TOSSUP: A composer from this country omitted the Dies Irae (DEE-ess EE-ray) from his 6-voice requiem Officium Defunctorum. In a piano suite from this country, a solemn religious song in F-sharpmajor notated with three staves (stavz) interrupts a boisterous march celebrating Corpus Christi Day. A seven-movement work that is [emphasize] set in this country begins with the bell of the Ave Maria and ends with the retreat of a military night watch. A ballet from this country includes a Dance of terror and a Song of the will-o-the-wisp. While working in this country, Luigi Boccherini (bo-care-REE-nee) wrote a string quintet called Night Music of the Streets of [a city in this country]. This country is home to Tomas Luis de Victoria and the composer of the ballet Love, the Magician. For 10 points, name this home country of Isaac Albeniz (EE-sahk all-BAY-neese) and Manuel de Falla (deh FAH-yah), the origin of dances such as the seguidilla (say-ghee-DEE-yah) and the fandango.

ANSWER: Spain [or Kingdom of Spain, or Reino de Espana] (The second sentence is about Iberia by Albeniz.) 

TOSSUP: A composer from this country wrote a piece inspired by electroencephalograms of people listening to one of his earlier works. A composer from this country wrote a string quartet in which the musicians play entire sections independently from each other, a technique he called controlled aleatoricism. A piece from this country scored for 48 string instruments, Polymorphia, uses its composers system of graphic notation in which note length is determined by the physical length of horizontal lines. That non-Bach composer from this country included a B-A-C-H motif in several tone rows in his atonal St.Lukes Passion. A composer from this country included Silesian folk songs and a prayer written on the wall of a Gestapo jail in his Symphony of Sorrowful Songs. For 10 points, name this home country of Witold Lutosawski (VEE-told loo-toh-SWAFF-skee), Krzysztof Penderecki (kSHISH-toff pen-duh-RETS-kee), and Henryk Gorecki (HEN-rick goo-RETS-kee).

ANSWER: Poland [or Republic of Poland; or Rzeczpospolita Polska] 

TOSSUP: A musician with this surname may have been influenced by street preacher Madkin Butler, as seen in a song recorded with Willie B.Harris titled for the writer of a Book of Seven Seals; that song is John the Revelator. An alcoholic guitarist with this last name sang about drinking Sterno in Canned Heat Blues. A musician with this surname used a knife instead of a bottleneck in his slide guitar accompaniment to a gospel blues track that was included on the Voyager Golden Record, titled Dark Was the Night; that musicians name was Blind Willie. Two unrelated musicians with this surname, one of whom was featured on the album King of the Delta Blues Singers, are said to have met a shady figure at a crossroads to gain their skills. For 10 points, give this surname of Tommy and Robert, both guitarists who allegedly sold their souls to the devil.

ANSWER: Johnson [accept Blind Willie Johnson, Tommy Johnson, or Robert Johnson] 

TOSSUP: The main theme of the second movement of a symphony by this composer may have come from a song from Faust set by Carl Friedrich Zelter. A symphony by this composer opens with the violas playing a slow, transposed version of the four-note first theme of the finale of the Jupiter Symphony. Due to its resemblance to a Berlioz piece, the slow movement of this composers fourth symphony is sometimes called a Pilgrims March. The introduction of this composers Fifth Symphony quotes a rising motif known as the Dresden Amen. This composers Third Symphony features a short-long rhythm called the Lombard or snap rhythm. This composer wrote his Fifth Symphony for the tricentennial of the Augsburg Confession, and his Fourth Symphony was inspired by dances like the tarantella and saltarello. For 10 points, name this composer of the Reformation, Scottish, and Italian symphonies.

ANSWER: Felix Mendelssohn [or Felix Mendelssohn Bartholdy] 

TOSSUP: One player of this instrument who wrote the songs Jade Visions and Glorias Step was replaced by Chuck Israels when he died in a car accident shortly after recording Sunday at the Village Vanguard. A piece by another player of this instrument was posthumously premiered under the baton of Gunther Schuller in 1989 and is 4,235 measures long. That piece, Epitaph, was composed by a player of this instrument who opened his album The Clown with his composition Haitian Fight Song. This instrument was played by Scott LaFaro and a musician who led a group called the Jazz Workshop. That player of this instrument paid tribute to Lester Young with the song Goodbye Porkpie Hat and recorded the albums Pithecanthropus Erectus and [his name] Ah Um. For 10 points, Charles Mingus played the upright form of what low-pitched string instrument?

ANSWER: double bass [or string bass; or upright bass] 

TOSSUP: This composers Stabat Mater, a motet scored for unaccompanied Double Chorus, may have been written for Pope GregoryXIV. One treatise on counterpoint is presented as a dialogue between Aloysius, who represents this composer, and the student Josephus; that textbook, which promoted this composers compositional style, is the Gradus ad Parnassum by Johann Joseph Fux (fooks). This composer wrote a cycle of 29 motets based on excerpts from the Song of Solomon. In an opera [emphasize] about this composer, he initially refuses to take a commission from Cardinal Borromeo, who then imprisons him. This composers most famous piece is a missa sin nomine (MEE-sah seen NOH-mee-nay) that, according to legend, convinced the Council of Trent not to ban polyphony from worship. For 10 points, name this Italian Renaissance composer of the Pope Marcellus Mass.

ANSWER: Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina 

TOSSUP: A standard rhythm originally from this style is traditionally counted [read slowly] onetwoTHREE fourfiveSIX sevenEIGHT nineTEN elevenTWELVE, with the strongest accent on twelve. For performing in this style, a certain instrument is often outfitted with a tap plate. Music in this tradition frequently uses the Phrygian mode, but often adds a melodic raised third or seventh. An instrumentalist in this style had a hit in the 70s with a song whose name translates as between two waters. Performers in this tradition use both open and cupped hands to make loud and soft handclaps, or palms. This traditions deep song was revived in the 1920s with a festival by Manuel de Falla (deh FAH-yah) and Federico Garcia Lorca. Extremely fast guitars and castanets typically accompany, for 10 points, what traditional music and dance style of Andalusian gypsies?

ANSWER: flamenco (This question translates the Spanish golpeador, Paco de Lucias Entre dos aguas, palmas, and cante jondo.) 

TOSSUP: In an overture, after a brief orchestral introduction, this instrument plays a melody in 3/4 that opens with the notes [read slowly] C E G E over pizzicato offbeats. In the opening of a tone poem in 9/4 time, a solo for this instrument is accompanied by muted strings divided into 13 parts. This instrument plays the opening melody, based on a love duet between Teresa and Benvenuto Cellini (chay-LEE-nee), in Berliozs Roman Carnival Overture. Along with the violas, this instrument introduces the love theme in Tchaikovskys Romeo and Juliet Fantasy Overture. The flute plays a call-and-response with this instrument in the Ranz des Vaches (rahntz day VAHSH) section of the William Tell Overture. This instrument represents a mythical bird in Jean Sibeliuss (zhahn sih-BAY-lee-uss) The Swan of Tuonela (TOO-oh-nay-lah). For 10 points, name this woodwind instrument that plays the solo in the Largo movement of the Symphony From the New World.

ANSWER: English horn [or cor anglais; do not accept or prompt on horn or French horn] 

TOSSUP: A piece inspired by this historical event features a youth choir chanting stock phrases like I am quite well, which were projected in the Royal Albert Hall during its premiere. The fourth movement of a composers Third Symphony inspired by this general event opens with a soft timpani roll accompanying a solo soprano singing a wordless, pentatonic melody. This event inspired Anna Merediths Five Telegrams, Vaughan Williamss A Pastoral Symphony, and a piano suite whose lively last movement opens with many repeated sixteenth-note Es. That E minor Toccata closes a Baroque-inspired suite whose six movements are dedicated to friends who participated in this event. This event inspired Ravels Le Tombeau de Couperin and a requiem that includes settings of poems by Wilfred Owen. For 10 points, name this event that inspired Benjamin Brittens War Requiem.

ANSWER: World War I [or WWI; or First World War; or the Great War; prompt on war; prompt on things like death by asking during which historical event?] 

TOSSUP: Composer and type of piece required. One of these pieces opens with a held B-flatmajor chord under a gentle rising and falling theme that starts with the notes E-natural,F. The F-sharpmajor largo second movement of one of these pieces is marked Cantabile e mesto (kahn-TAH-bee-lay ay MESS-toh); that piece is sometimes nicknamed Graveyard. The third movement of one of these pieces is known as the Witches Minuet, and its first movement opens with two measures of falling fifths. The second movement of one of these pieces is a theme-and-variations on the composers own hymn God Save Emperor Francis, which later became the Deutschlandlied (DOYTCH-lahnd-leed). A set of six of these pieces, which includes ones nicknamed Sunrise, Fifths, and Emperor, was dedicated to Count Erdody (AIR-der-dee) and labeled Opus76. For 10 points, name these pieces of chamber music by the Austrian Father of their form.

ANSWER: string quartets by Franz Joseph Haydn [prompt on partial answer; accept answers that also include Opus76 or Erdody until read, as all the pieces in the tossup are from Op.76; prompt on SQ] 

TOSSUP: A piece in this genre opens with a tutti chord and a theme in triplets that ends with an eighth-noteE, a half-noteF, and resolves back toE; that three-note figure then repeats an octave lower. The third movement of Shostakovichs Eighth String Quartet ends with a violin quoting the angular four-note motto that opens his first piece in this genre. Camille Saint-Saenss (kuh-MEE san-SAWNSs) first piece of this type in Aminor has one continuous movement. Beatrice Harrison first recorded and Felix Salmond first played a piece of this type whose opening recitative marked nobilmente begins with the soloists wide half-note Eminor chord. An EMI recording of that Eminor work of this type was conducted by Sir John Barbirolli. Jacqueline du Pre popularized Edward Elgars only foray into, for 10 points, what type of composition for a low string instrument accompanied by an orchestra?

ANSWER: cello concerto [prompt on concerto or CC] 

TOSSUP: A slow, bittersweet tenor aria opens with this instrument, over B-flat minor arpeggios, playing the steady notes F, down to fiveB-flats, followed by a fastA andC. That aria is sung by a character who, after spending all of his money to woo a woman, has finally seen his love requited. After a somber introduction in the clarinet and strings in Tchaikovskys Symphony No.5, this instrument and the clarinet play the first main theme. This instrument introduces the melody of Donizettis Una furtiva lagrima. Accompanied by harp and muted strings, this instrument also introduces the main melody of the Berceuse from The Firebird. This instrument represents the grandfather in Peter and the Wolf and opens with a high solo in Stravinskys Rite of Spring. For 10 points, name this low-pitched double-reed woodwind instrument.

ANSWER: bassoon [accept fagotto; do not accept contrabassoon] 

TOSSUP: The second movement of a sonata for this instrument, marked Cantilena, opens with the piano playing a slow, rising B-flatminor arpeggio in eighthnotes one beat before this instrument starts the same arpeggio. The Coolidge Foundation commissioned that sonata for this instrument, whose first movement in Eminor is marked Allegro malinconico, from Francis Poulenc (frawn-SEESE poo-LANK). Jacques Ibert (ee-BAIR) wrote a concerto in Dmajor for this instrument for Marcel Moyse (moh-EEZ), and the Paris Conservatoire commissioned a Dmajor concertino for this instrument by Cecile Chaminade (say-SEEL sha-mee-NOD). Georges Barreres platinum model of this instrument inspired Edgard Vareses (ed-GARR vah-REZs) piece Density 21.5. This instrument played by Jean-Pierre Rampal and James Galway begins with descending and ascending chromatic notes in the Prelude to the Afternoon of a Faun. For 10 points, name this woodwind instrument, the larger sibling of the piccolo.

ANSWER: flute 

TOSSUP: This composer adapted his first ballet, Happiness, into another ballet in which a man threatens to throw his child Ripsime (rip-SEE-meh) off a cliff. In the middle section of an excerpt from that ballet by this composer, the cellos and saxophone play a sinuous melody that opens with the rising pickup quarter notes F, A-flat, B-flat before landing on B-natural. That excerpt by this composer is heard during a triple wedding whose couples include Karen and Nune [pause] and Kazakov and the title character. During an Adagio from one of this composers ballets, the title character and his wife Phrygia celebrate escaping from captivity. An excerpt from one of this composers ballets includes trombone glissandi from F down to D and opens with piercing F-sharp eighth notes in the xylophone. For 10 points, name this Soviet composer of Spartacus, whose ballet Gayane (gah-yah-nay) contains the Sabre Dance, and who was from Armenia.

ANSWER: Aram Khachaturian [or Aram Ilyich Khatchaturian] 

TOSSUP: This musicians first published instrumental song was a novelty rag called Rialto Ripples. A song composed by this musician is the origin of a 32-bar chord progression whose Bsection consists of seventhchords on scale degrees 3,6,2,and 5; that progression is the basis of many songs by other musicians, including Anthropology and Cotton Tail. This musician wrote a standard that was originally included in, but later removed from, several musicals that he collaborated on, including Rosalie, Strike Up the Band, and Lady, Be Good; that song is The Man I Love. A jazz chord progression known as rhythm changes derives from this composers song I Got Rhythm. One of this composers songs describes how the livin is easy, the fish are jumpin on Catfish Row. For 10 points, name this composer who wrote the song Summertime for his opera Porgy and Bess.

ANSWER: George Gershwin [or George Jacob Gershwin; or Jacob Bruskin Gershowitz; accept Ira Gershwin or Israel Gershowitz until 32-bar is read] 

TOSSUP: An instrumental section in this work is in 12/8time and opens with a rising violin melody fromC toA while the basses play a drone onC. An aria for bass in this work features long melismatic phrases on the word changed and contains a difficult trumpet solo that is often played today on piccolo trumpet. In one aria in this piece, a soprano declares that even though worms destroy this body, I shall see God. This work includes an interlude that emulates Italian bagpipers called the Pifa, and it also features the arias The trumpet shall sound and I know that my Redeemer liveth. A chorus sings King of Kings and Lord of Lords in a section of this work during which the audience traditionally stands. For 10 points, name this work that contains the Hallelujah chorus, an oratorio by George Frideric Handel.

ANSWER: Messiah 

TOSSUP: This composer adapted material from his first two symphonies for his Opus 8, a series of twelve Silhouettes for piano. In the F-sharp minor middle section of a piece by this composer, almost every phrase opens with the notes [read slowly] F-sharp G-sharp A G-sharp A; that G-flat major piano piece was supposedly inspired by a train ride, and Fritz Kreisler arranged it for violin in Gmajor. This composer based a set of sixteen pieces originally for piano four-hands on dances such as the sousedska (SOH-set-skah) or skocna (SKOATCH-nah). This composer of two Furianty (FOO-ree-ont-ee) and eight Humoresques for piano also drew from a national folk dance to write a six-movement piano trio subtitled Dumky. For 10 points, name this Czech composer of the Slavonic Dances and a Symphony No.9 From the New World.

ANSWER: Antonin Dvorak 

TOSSUP: A cantata from this country inspired a piano concerto that quotes LInternationale in its finale titled Defend [a river in this country]. In a concerto from this country, the percussion soloists hit cardboard tubes and shake pom-poms made of paper strips; the composer of that Paper Concerto wrote a brief Eroica symphony for the YouTube Symphony Orchestra. A piece that sets poetry from this country ends with sprinkles of mandolin, harp, and celesta over sustained chords in the rest of the orchestra, above which the alto soloist repeats the word ewig (AY-vig). That piece inspired by this country has movements titled The Drunkard in Spring and The Drinking Song of Earths Sorrow. That piece inspired by this countrys poetry, written as a way to circumvent the Curse of the Ninth, is Mahlers Song of the Earth. For 10 points, name this home country of composer Tan Dun and poet Li Bai.

ANSWER: China [or Peoples Republic of China; or Zhongguo or Zhonghua Renmin Gongheguo] 

TOSSUP: A song in this language ends with the vocalist singing ha-ha-ha down the F-sharpPhrygian scale. That song in this language, which describes the absurd friendship between a king and an insect, was inspired by the scene in Faust of Mephistopheles visiting Auerbachs cellar. In the first song of a cycle in this language, a babysitter lullabies a sick child into eternal sleep; the final song of that cycle personifies Death as a field marshal. This language was used for The Song of the Flea and Songs and Dances of Death. In an aria in this language, a character implores Let me perish, but firstbefore writing an impassioned love letter. In that opera in this language, which includes the Letter aria, the title character initially rejects Tatyana and later kills Lensky in a duel. For 10 points, name this language used in the opera Eugene Onegin and in songs by Modest Mussorgsky.

ANSWER: Russian 

TOSSUP: Walter Damrosch commissioned this composer's final work, which this composer explained to his publishers with a quatrain about the forest's mighty god. Tristan Murail's Gondwana quotes movement two of a collection by this composer whose first movement depicts its subject and the Maidens of the Island. That second movement of a suite by this composer is in 9/4 and features an English horn solo. This composer recycled material from his unfinished Wagnerian opera The Building of the Boat in that composition. A piece made for the 1899 Press Celebrations by this composer features a hymn melody that was adapted into Be Still My Soul. This composer of Tapiola created a nationalistic piece often titled A Scandinavian Choral March to deceive Russian censors. For 10 points, name this composer of The Swan of Tuonela and Finlandia.

ANSWER: Jean Sibelius 

TOSSUP: A perpetuum mobile piece in this genre commonly misattributed to Franz Schubert is Francois Schubert's The Bee. Pieces in this genre are collected in Beethoven's Opus 119, Opus 126, and Opus 33. A set of five pieces of this type for clarinet and piano were made by Gerald Finzi, while six of these pieces for string quartet make up Anton Webern's Opus 9. The manuscript of an omnitonic piece usually named for being in this genre names it as the Fourth Mephisto Waltz. An A minor Albumblatt discovered by Ludwig Nohl is more commonly called the 25th piece in this genre by a certain composer. Liszt subtitled a heavily chromatic piece in this genre for being without tonality. A piano piece in this genre likely depicts the wife of Johann Hummel in the 3/8 opening's rapid alternations between sixteenth note Es and D-sharps. For 10 points, name this genre which includes Beethoven's Fur Elise.

ANSWER: bagatelles

TOSSUP: The Moderato e risoluto first movement of a G major sonata by this composer introduces the Grand Motif. A piece by this composer quotes the chansonette Il faut s'amuser, danser, et rire and includes a three-note phrase referencing the name of the soprano Desiree Artot. Hans von Bulow premiered that piece by this composer in Boston when its original dedicatee rejected it. This composer included a barcarolle inspired by June in a set of twelve character pieces, entitled The Seasons. Van Cliburn's version of this composer's B-flat minor concerto, which opens with three descending horn figures, helped him win the piano section of the inaugural 1958 iteration of an international competition that is named for this composer and held every four years in Moscow. For 10 points, name this composer who also wrote the 1812 Overture.

ANSWER: Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky [or Peter Ilyich Tchaikovsky; or Tchaik]

TOSSUP: This musician invented figures such as the musicologist Karlheinz Klopweisser to write negative reviews of his own playing. This performer said that a piece he popularized rests lightly on the wings of the unchecked wind like Baudelaire's lovers in a set of liner notes. This musician praised the take-twoness of the studio that allowed him to record 21 versions of the first part of that piece. Alberto Guerrero taught this player the finger tapping technique he pioneered. This performer enraged listeners with his habit of humming during his concerts, which may have been due to Asperger's syndrome. In a televised recording, Leonard Bernstein (burn-styne) asked Who is the boss? before this musician played a half-speed version of a Brahms concerto. In 1981, he recorded a slower version of the Bach piece he first played on a best-selling 1955 album. For 10 points, name this Canadian pianist who popularized the Goldberg Variations.

ANSWER: Glenn Gould 

TOSSUP: Six pieces in this genre released between 1986 and 2016 were all dedicated to Marin Alsop of the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra. An opening woodwind duet was added to a B-flat major piece in this genre when it was reincorporated into the composer's third and final symphony, the so-called Great American Symphony. A collection of pieces of this type that honor risk-takers and adventurers were written by Joan Tower. A piece of this type named for Sokol is played on nine trumpets to open Janacek's Sinfonietta. Three trumpets play a rising F, B-flat, F figure throughout a piece in this genre, which lends its name to a type of elongated natural trumpet that supports a hanging banner. The aforementioned piece in this genre was commissioned by Eugene Goosens to honor World War II soldiers. For 10 points, name this genre of an Aaron Copland piece for the Common Man.

ANSWER: fanfares [accept fanfarades or flourishes]

TOSSUP: Dinah Washington's What a Diff'rence a Day Made was adapted from a song by a female composer from this country. Carlo Curti brought this country's Typical Orchestra to the New Orleans Cotton Exhibition. This is the home country of Maria Grever, as well as the country in which the modern two-row marimba was designed. The violin, jarana, and haupangera are used for the huapango music native to this country. The traditional percussion instruments of three native tribes, including the Yaqui, are used in a single-movement symphony from this country. The composer of Sinfonia India was a native of this country who influenced Aaron Copland 's musical depiction of one of its dance halls; that composer was Carlos Chavez. For 10 points, La Bamba is a song from what homeland of mariachi music?

ANSWER: Mexico [or United Mexican States or Estados Unidos Mexicanos]

TOSSUP: This country inspired the recurring moto perpetuo figures in a D minor concerto for two pianos whose closing rondo imitates this country's music. The Aeolian mode of a Assez vif, tres rhythme movement's first theme references this country's colotomic music; that movement is in a quartet that was inspired by an earlier piece in the same genre in G minor. The Voyager Golden Record includes a ketawang from this country titled Puspawarna. The Gnossiennes of Erik Satie were inspired by a musical form from this country that uses heptatonic pelogs and pentatonic slendros. That music from this country is played to accompany wayang shadow-puppet shows by large percussion ensembles, and also inspired the Estampes of Debussy, including his Pagodes. For 10 points, name this country whose gamelan ensembles come in Balinese and Javanese varieties.

ANSWER: Republic of Indonesia [or Republik Indonesia]

TOSSUP: In one collection, this composer ordered six arias so their keys span a perfect fifth; a Nuremberg church names the Sebaldina aria that closes that collection by this musician. This composer wrote six surviving chaconnes, two of which are respectively in D minor and F minor. This composer of 95 Magnificat Fugues instructed two violins that play over continuo to use scordatura tuning throughout a set of six suites. A piece by this composer was catapulted to fame by Jean-Francois Paillard's 1968 recording. His less popular works include Hexachord Apollonis, Musical Delight, and Musical Thoughts on Death. This composer wrote a piece in which a characteristic shifted romanesca bass pattern of (read slowly, with pauses) 1,5,6,3,4,1,4,5 is played 28 times by the continuo as three violins play the melody in a round. For 10 points, name this Baroque composer who paired a gigue (zeeg) with his Canon in D.

ANSWER: Johann Pachelbel 

TOSSUP: This composition almost never saw the light of day due the composer's worry that people [would] go home and shoot themselves after listening due to its pessimism. The last movement of this work is marked without regard for tempo and is the only movement to employ a celesta, which is joined by harp and mandolin. This work ends with the orchestra fading out as the soloist twice repeats the word ewig. A refrain meaning Dark is life, dark is death is pitched a semitome higher each time it appears in the first movement of this piece. A book by Hans Bethge was the source of the texts for this work, whose movements Of Youth, Of Beauty, and The Drunkard in Spring are based on poems by Li Bai. Left unnumbered to avoid the curse of the ninth,for 10 pointsname this song-symphony by Gustav Mahler.

ANSWER: TheSong of the Earth[orDasLied von der Erde]

TOSSUP: The second movement of a concerto for this instrument is a scherzo-like Vivo, con moto preciso. That concerto was first recorded by Frederick Riddle and originally dedicated to Christabel McLaren. A fugato based on The Cuckoo Sat on the Fence is part of a Concerto from Old Folk Songs for this instrument that is usually named for a folk song about an organ grinder. Lionel Tertis and William Primrose played this instrument, for which Trauermusik and Der Schwanendreher were written. Paul Hindemith premiered a concerto for this instrument by William Walton. The commissioner rejected a symphony that features this instrument for having too many rests in the solo part. That piece, which ends with the Orgy of the Brigands, is Harold in Italy. For 10 points, name this instrument that uses the alto clef, unlike the smaller violin.

ANSWER: viola Round 7Bonuses

TOSSUP: This film uses two pieces titled De Natura Sonoris. A crane shot transitions between a model and the object it represents in a part of this film that uses an excerpt of night music by Bela Bartok. This film's theme, which adapts the Dream of a Witches' Sabbath from Symphonie Fantastique, was made by Rachel Elkind and Wendy Carlos. Though it does not star Linda Blair, parts of the tone cluster-heavy pieces Utrejna, Polymorphia, and The Awakening of Jacob were used in this film. In this movie, Midnight, the Stars and You plays as a slow zoom into the Gold Room shows the main character anachronistically appear in a photo of a 1921 party. A piece by Penderecki plays in this film when a bigwheel rider turns the corner to see identical twins. For 10 points, name this Stanley Kubrick film set in a hotel in Colorado, which influenced the music of subsequent horror films.

ANSWER: The Shining Arts Film - Smith

TOSSUP: Oscar Levant performed an arrangement of this piece for piano and orchestra in The Barkleys of Broadway after his efforts partly led Newsweek to proclaim 1948 the year of its composer due to this piece's popularity. In one suite, this piece was sandwiched between an adagio depicting carpet weavers and a Hopak, the former of which was popularized by 2001: A Space Odyssey. In Nina Anisimova's original choreography, this piece serves as the climax to a triple wedding. A xylophone solo over strings in this piece is punctuated by trombone glissandi. The xylophone plays rapid F-sharp eighth notes to open this piece excerpted from a ballet set at a collective farm. For 10 points, name this fast-paced piece excerpted from Gayane, a ballet by Aram Khachaturian.

ANSWER: Sabre Dance [accept Suserov par or Tanets s sablyami]

TOSSUP: This composer's opus 3, which includes a serenade named for him, was likely written by his obsessive admirer Roman Hoffstetter. One piece by this composer received its nickname from a passage in which the first violin plays the notes D and A in unison with a technique called bariolage. An opus 10 collection (emphasize) dedicated to this composer contains pieces nicknamed Spring and Hunt. In a piece by this composer, a sudden forte sixteenth note closes a rondo after a grand pause, which is followed by a violin playing the A theme with extra rests every two bars. This composer of The Frog is the dedicatee of a quartet nicknamed Dissonance. This composer's Opus 20 collection of chamber pieces is named for its cover image. For 10 points, name this composer of The Joke and a set of pieces nicknamed Sun, which were among the 68 string quartets created by this father of that genre.

ANSWER: Franz Joseph Haydn 

TOSSUP: This composer was inspired by an interview with police beating victim Daniel Hamm in which he said I had to, like, open the bruise up to compose a piece for the benefit of the Harlem Six. The story of Noah opens a piece by this composer that features the Pentecostal preacher Brother Walter. Strings play broken chords in paradiddle rhythms in a chamber piece by this composer of Come Out and It's Gonna Rain. An unplugged vibraphone is used to mark sections of another piece by this composer which is based on a cycle of eleven chords. This composer repeated phrases like New York to Los Angeles and bits of conversations with Holocaust survivors in one of his string quartets. This composer named many pieces for the phasing technique he pioneered. For 10 points, name this minimalist composer of Music for 18 Musicians and Different Trains.

ANSWER: Steve Reich 

TOSSUP: In one collection, this composer ordered six arias so their keys span a perfect fifth; a Nuremberg church names the Sebaldina aria that closes that collection by this musician. This composer wrote six surviving chaconnes, two of which are respectively in D minor and F minor. This composer of 95 Magnificat Fugues instructed two violins that play over continuo to use scordatura tuning throughout a set of six suites. A piece by this composer was catapulted to fame by Jean-Francois Paillard's 1968 recording. His less popular works include Hexachord Apollonis, Musical Delight, and Musical Thoughts on Death. This composer wrote a piece in which a characteristic shifted romanesca bass pattern of (read slowly, with pauses) 1,5,6,3,4,1,4,5 is played 28 times by the continuo as three violins play the melody in a round. For 10 points, name this Baroque composer who paired a gigue (zeeg) with his Canon in D.

ANSWER: Johann Pachelbel 

TOSSUP: The second movement of a concerto for this instrument is a scherzo-like Vivo, con moto preciso. That concerto was first recorded by Frederick Riddle and originally dedicated to Christabel McLaren. A fugato based on The Cuckoo Sat on the Fence is part of a Concerto from Old Folk Songs for this instrument that is usually named for a folk song about an organ grinder. Lionel Tertis and William Primrose played this instrument, for which Trauermusik and Der Schwanendreher were written. Paul Hindemith premiered a concerto for this instrument by William Walton. The commissioner rejected a symphony that features this instrument for having too many rests in the solo part. That piece, which ends with the Orgy of the Brigands, is Harold in Italy. For 10 points, name this instrument that uses the alto clef, unlike the smaller violin.

ANSWER: viola Round 7Bonuses

TOSSUP: The Moderato e risoluto first movement of a G major sonata by this composer introduces the Grand Motif. A piece by this composer quotes the chansonette Il faut s'amuser, danser, et rire and includes a three-note phrase referencing the name of the soprano Desiree Artot. Hans von Bulow premiered that piece by this composer in Boston when its original dedicatee rejected it. This composer included a barcarolle inspired by June in a set of twelve character pieces, entitled The Seasons. Van Cliburn's version of this composer's B-flat minor concerto, which opens with three descending horn figures, helped him win the piano section of the inaugural 1958 iteration of an international competition that is named for this composer and held every four years in Moscow. For 10 points, name this composer who also wrote the 1812 Overture.

ANSWER: Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky [or Peter Ilyich Tchaikovsky; or Tchaik]

TOSSUP: This country inspired the recurring moto perpetuo figures in a D minor concerto for two pianos whose closing rondo imitates this country's music. The Aeolian mode of a Assez vif, tres rhythme movement's first theme references this country's colotomic music; that movement is in a quartet that was inspired by an earlier piece in the same genre in G minor. The Voyager Golden Record includes a ketawang from this country titled Puspawarna. The Gnossiennes of Erik Satie were inspired by a musical form from this country that uses heptatonic pelogs and pentatonic slendros. That music from this country is played to accompany wayang shadow-puppet shows by large percussion ensembles, and also inspired the Estampes of Debussy, including his Pagodes. For 10 points, name this country whose gamelan ensembles come in Balinese and Javanese varieties.

ANSWER: Republic of Indonesia [or Republik Indonesia]

TOSSUP: In the second movement of this symphony, the first violins spell out the tonic of the relative minor in four notes before a solo clarinet plays the second theme in that relative minor's parallel key, then passes it to a solo oboe. An allegro moderato theme opening (read slowly, with pauses) G low D G F-sharp G F A is played by the cellos in this symphony's first movement. That movement's first theme begins with two repetitions of a slurred dotted half, dotted quarter, eighth eighth eighth figure on oboe and clarinet. Either a Philosopher's Scherzo and March of Destiny by August Ludwig, or Brain Newbould's suggestion of edits made from the B minor entr'acte from the composer's incidental music to Rosamunde, are sometimes added to this piece. For 10 points, name this numerical predecessor to the composer's Great C minor symphony, a B minor composition by Franz Schubert whose scherzo is incomplete.

ANSWER: The Unfinished Symphony [or Franz Schubert's Symphony No. 8 in B minor; or D 759; accept 8 or Eighth after Schubert is read]

TOSSUP: A vivace theme evoking this country was first used in the composer's Six Variations on an Original Theme before it was reused for a play by August von Kotzebue. Gaetano Donizetti's older brother Giuseppe wrote two marches for this country's rulers, then became an influential royal music instructor in its capital. A 2/4 section interrupting the finale of Mozart's 5th violin concerto gave it a nickname referencing this country. A stop named for this country sometimes adorned early 19th century pianos. This country's mahtars are evoked in a 2/4 march from The Ruins of Athens. The aforementioned stop was used to play the last movement of an A major piano sonata, numbered the composer's eleventh, in this country's namesake style. The percussion of Haydn's Military symphony mimics this country's music. For 10 points, name this country that names a rondo by Mozart that imitates its Janissary bands.

ANSWER: Republic of Turkey [or the Ottoman Empire]

TOSSUP: A vivace theme evoking this country was first used in the composer's Six Variations on an Original Theme before it was reused for a play by August von Kotzebue. Gaetano Donizetti's older brother Giuseppe wrote two marches for this country's rulers, then became an influential royal music instructor in its capital. A 2/4 section interrupting the finale of Mozart's 5th violin concerto gave it a nickname referencing this country. A stop named for this country sometimes adorned early 19th century pianos. This country's mahtars are evoked in a 2/4 march from The Ruins of Athens. The aforementioned stop was used to play the last movement of an A major piano sonata, numbered the composer's eleventh, in this country's namesake style. The percussion of Haydn's Military symphony mimics this country's music. For 10 points, name this country that names a rondo by Mozart that imitates its Janissary bands.

ANSWER: Republic of Turkey [or the Ottoman Empire]

TOSSUP: Oscar Levant performed an arrangement of this piece for piano and orchestra in The Barkleys of Broadway after his efforts partly led Newsweek to proclaim 1948 the year of its composer due to this piece's popularity. In one suite, this piece was sandwiched between an adagio depicting carpet weavers and a Hopak, the former of which was popularized by 2001: A Space Odyssey. In Nina Anisimova's original choreography, this piece serves as the climax to a triple wedding. A xylophone solo over strings in this piece is punctuated by trombone glissandi. The xylophone plays rapid F-sharp eighth notes to open this piece excerpted from a ballet set at a collective farm. For 10 points, name this fast-paced piece excerpted from Gayane, a ballet by Aram Khachaturian.

ANSWER: Sabre Dance [accept Suserov par or Tanets s sablyami]

TOSSUP: Both the standard form of this instrument and a low form of it are used in Charpentier's Te Deum. This instrument is now used to play a D major excerpt from the semi-opera The Island Princess. A popular arrangement by Henry Wood adds strings and this instrument to a piece by the first organist of the rebuilt St Paul's Cathedral. The most prolific Baroque era composer for this instrument was Giuseppe Torelli. The third movement of the second Brandenburg concerto opens with a solo in its clarino register, though its piccolo variety is often used instead. A piece misattributed to Purcell is a Tune titled for this instrument by Jeremiah Clarke, whose Prince of Denmark's March is often named for it. For 10 points, name this instrument with a popular namesake Voluntary.

ANSWER: trumpets

TOSSUP: A piece by this composer that quotes the Hallelujah Chorus in its final Presto movement was partly inspired by the Walpurgis night from Faust. That piece by this composer opens Allegro moderato ma con fuoco in the key of E-flat major and contains a celebrated Allegro leggierissimo scherzo. A concerto by this composer uses the allegro, high theme (read slowly) long B B long B G E long E B to open the Allegro molto appassionato first movement, which is unusually not introduced by an orchestral tutti. This creator of 12 string symphonies claimed that aforementioned theme gave him no peace. At age 16, he wrote a piece played by a double quartet; part of that string octet is sometimes used in a symphony he wrote for the birthday of his sister Fanny. For 10 points, name this composer of an E minor violin concerto, also known for the wedding march from his incidental music to A Midsummer Night's Dream.

ANSWER: (Jakob Ludwig) Felix Mendelssohn Bartholdy

TOSSUP: The opening Allegro molto moderato melody of a piece for this ensemble begins C C C, grace note C up to long F, C; that four movement piece in F minor is played entirely attaca. A set of pieces for this ensemble depicting Petit mari, petite femme, Blind Man's Bluff, and other games was written by Georges Bizet. Another piece for this ensemble was dedicated to the Godebski family by Maurice Ravel. A piece originally for this ensemble is based on Bartfai emlek, a czardas. A collection including that piece inspired two sousedskas, two skocnas, and two furiants in a collection originally for this ensemble written by Dvorak. Schubert's F minor Fantasy and his Grand C major sonata, like Brahms' Hungarian Dances, were written for this domestic ensemble. For 10 points, name this ensemble in which two players use one keyboard instrument.

ANSWER: piano four hands [accept anything about two pianists playing one piano; prompt on just two pianists, piano duet, piano, and duet; do not accept anything indicating that two separate pianos are being played]

TOSSUP: Since modern horns no longer require hand-stopping for key changes, it is now rare for the recapitulation of this symphony's first movement to be introduced by the bassoons as indicated in the score. A legend suggests that part of this symphony was inspired by a yellowhammer bird. This symphony borrows from the overture to Eliza, but it is less certain that it references Luigi Cherubini's Hymne au Pantheon. The second theme of the exposition in its opening is played in E-flat, the relative major, by a pair of French horns. This piece's original title, Destiny, is no longer used. The codetta to the first movement of this symphony references the two fortissimo phrases that open this symphony in C minor, the first of which, played by clarinets and strings, is the phrase (read slowly) G G G long E flat. For 10 points, name this symphony with a fate knocking at the door motif by Ludwig van Beethoven.

ANSWER: Symphony No. 5 by Ludwig van Beethoven in C minor [or Beethoven's Fifth; accept just 5 or Fifth after Beethoven is read]

TOSSUP: Since modern horns no longer require hand-stopping for key changes, it is now rare for the recapitulation of this symphony's first movement to be introduced by the bassoons as indicated in the score. A legend suggests that part of this symphony was inspired by a yellowhammer bird. This symphony borrows from the overture to Eliza, but it is less certain that it references Luigi Cherubini's Hymne au Pantheon. The second theme of the exposition in its opening is played in E-flat, the relative major, by a pair of French horns. This piece's original title, Destiny, is no longer used. The codetta to the first movement of this symphony references the two fortissimo phrases that open this symphony in C minor, the first of which, played by clarinets and strings, is the phrase (read slowly) G G G long E flat. For 10 points, name this symphony with a fate knocking at the door motif by Ludwig van Beethoven.

ANSWER: Symphony No. 5 by Ludwig van Beethoven in C minor [or Beethoven's Fifth; accept just 5 or Fifth after Beethoven is read]

TOSSUP: A 2/4 Presto ma non assai theme interrupts the third movement of this composer's second symphony, which starts Allegretto grazioso (quasi andantino). In a symphony by this composer, the cellos play two repetitions of a (read slowly) slurred dotted eighth sixteenth slurred dotted quarter dotted eighth sixteenth eighth rhythm to start the third movement's melody. A symphony by this composer is based around a D C-sharp D motif introduced in the first movement by the cellos and basses; that motif was first used in a piece he wrote for Bertha Faber's second son. For his F minor third symphony, this composer modified the idea of a friend's F-A-E motto to make his own F A-flat F motto. This composer's first symphony quotes the fate motif of Beethoven. For 10 points, name this composer of a symphony nicknamed Beethoven's Tenth who also created a namesake lullaby.

ANSWER: Johannes Brahms 

TOSSUP: This collection uses a motif consisting of the four notes (read slowly) B-flat, E-flat, D, and B-flat in a movement which opens with a harp solo imitating Lumir. The third portion of this work depicts the murder of a drunk warrior after he frees Sarka from a tree. Giuseppe Cenci's La Mantovana is the basis for the theme of this work's second movement. The rising allegro commodo, non agitato theme (read slowly) B low E F-sharp G A B B B is played in that movement. This collection uses two flutes playing sixteenth notes to depict two sources of a river in a movement that supplies the melody of the Israeli national anthem, Hatikvah. Ye Who Are Warriors of God, a Hussite hymn, is quoted twice in this work. Parts of this work depict theVysehrad (VISH-eh-raht) castle and the Vltava (vull-TAH-vah) River. For 10 points, name this set of six tone poems including The Moldau by Bedrich Smetana.

ANSWER: Ma vlast [or My Homeland]

TOSSUP: This was the original genre of a C-minor piece that includes a Minuet marked in canone with a Trio marked in canone al rovescio. A piece in this genre includes an E-flat-major Romance in 3/4 thats interrupted by a C-minor Allegretto in 2/4. Mozarts C-minor string quintet is an arrangement of a piece in this genre. A B-flat-major piece in this genre unusually calls for four horns as well as pairs of both clarinets and basset horns. That Mozart piece in this genre includes two (*) Minuets with two Trios each among its seven movements. Theyre not symphonies, but Mozart wrote works nicknamed Haffner and Posthorn in this genre. Mozarts Gran Partita is a piece in this genre for thirteen wind instruments. Eine kleine Nachtmusik is infor 10 pointswhat light genre of music similar to a divertimento?

ANSWER: serenades 

TOSSUP: One of the first works from this movement begins with a spoken monologue addressed to Patty Hearst standing there in front of the / Symbionese Liberation army flag. Members of this movement performed on a Thames riverboat during Elizabeth IIs silver jubilee. A venue pivotal to this movement was founded to showcase Country Bluegrass and Blues music and had a house band led by Willy DeVille. Legs McNeil wrote an oral history of this movement titled Please Kill Me. Early influences on this movement included MC5 and the (*) New York Dolls, who served as the prototype for a more successful band also managed by Malcolm McLaren. Many artists from this movement played at the CBGB club, including The Dictators, Richard Hell, and Patti Smith. For 10 points, identify this subculture that emerged around 1976, inspired by music from the Ramones and the Sex Pistols.

ANSWER: punk [or punk rock] DS

TOSSUP: After his 1652 death, four composers wrote tombeaux for a player of this instrument named Blancrocher [blawn-croh-SHAY]. The first pieces titled Ricercar were written by players of this instrument like Marco dallAquila and Francesco da Milano. Scholars have recently come to doubt that Bach had this instrument in mind with his two-stave transcriptions of the E-major violin partita and C-minor cello suite. An ancestor of the viola da gamba called the vihuela was created as an alternative to this instrument. The irregularly arpeggiated style brise derived from music for this instrument. A player of this instrument wrote a collection of (*) Seven Tears called Lachrimae. This instrument, which was enlarged in an arch- variant, derived from the Islamic oud. This round-backed instrument accompanies songs like Flow My Tears by John Dowland. For 10 points, name this early plucked string instrument similar to the guitar.

ANSWER: lutes 

TOSSUP: A late piece by this composer uses the unusual scale [read slowly] C, D-flat, E, F-sharp, G-sharp, A-sharp, B, C. This composer unusually used a Scherzo Fuga as the last movement of his string quartet in E minor. This composer alternated slashing G minor chords with bass drum thwacks in a choral movement that returns in the seventh and final movement. This composers last major piece was a set of Four (*) Sacred Pieces. This composer imitated Berlioz by using four offstage trumpets to build up the opening fanfare of the Tuba Mirum of an 1874 piece. That piece by this composer includes mezzo-soprano and soprano solos in its Lux Aeterna and Libera Me sections. For 10 points, name this Italian composer of a Requiem in memory of Alessandro Manzoni, who also wrote operas like Otello and Rigoletto.

ANSWER: Giuseppe (Fortunino Francesco) Verdi 

TOSSUP: One of this mans performances begins [read slowly] in swung eighths by arpeggiating up from E-flat on an A-flat add-6 chord. Late in his career, this pianist made a trio recording with Lionel Hampton and Buddy Rich, and he recorded tracks like Gone With the Wind and Have You Met Miss Jones with Ben Webster in 1956. This pianist would sometimes invert a then-standard technique by jumping from a left-hand chord to a root note an octave higher. Andre Previn said that he feels like a jerk after playing one of this mans renditions of Sweet Lorraine, and Oscar Peterson claimed that hearing one of this mans recordings as a kid led him to (*) quit piano for a few months. This man often improvised on Dvoraks Humoresque. He made his name in 30s Harlem by beating Fats Waller in a cutting contest. For 10 points, name this mostly-blind Stride-era pianist, known for virtuosic versions of Tiger Rag and Tea for Two.

ANSWER: Art(hur) Tatum (Jr.) 

TOSSUP: A piece in this genre mocks a prince of spite named Hugo with another text about Nebuchadnezzars statue. Pieces in this genre that adopted the notational innovations of Franco of Cologne were collected in the Montpellier Codex. Composers of these pieces originated the use of melodic segments called colors with repeated rhythmic patterns called taleas. All of Philippe de Vitrys surviving works are in this genre. Pieces in this genre, which derived from clausulae of Notre Dame organum, were always (*) polytextual, and often polylingual in the 13th and 14th centuries, when they typically used isorhythm. These pieces were replaced in England by anthems in the 16th century, when these pieces could be contrasted with secular works like madrigals. For 10 points, give this highly ambiguous term used for a shortish piece of sacred polyphonic choral music.

ANSWER: motets [accept more specific answers like isorhythmic motets] 

TOSSUP: This musician was attributed a number of compositions in an extremely dubious PhD dissertation by Martin Jarvis, which has been dismissed by scholars like Christoph Wolff. A collection named for this musician includes a slightly simplified version of a Rondeau by Francois Couperin. That collection named for this musician includes a piece that begins with a quarter note D, followed by the ascending eighths G A (*) B C D. This musician, who died as a beggar in 1760, married a first cousin who was working at the court in Kothen. The song Bist du bei mir and a Minuet in G were included in a 1725 Notebook for this musician. Maria Barbara was followed byfor 10 pointswhat mother of Johann Christian, the second wife of Johann Sebastian Bach?

ANSWER: Anna Magdalena Bach [accept Anna Magdalena Bach; prompt on just Bach; accept Anna Magdalena Wilcken] 

TOSSUP: A schizo-eclectic piece from this country is subtitled Say sea, take me! in reference to the influence of Debussys La mer on the composer. A one-movement piece from this country includes several long pauses during which poetry by Rabindranath Tagore is to be recited. After hearing that piece from this country, Eclipse, Leonard Bernstein made suggestions that inspired its composer to write the piece (*) November Steps. A pianist born in this country won the 1989 Instrumental Gramophone Award for her recording of all eighteen Mozart piano sonatas. The book Absolutely on Music details conversations with a conductor from this country who was known for wearing a signature white turtleneck during his 29 year tenure as conductor of the Boston Symphony Orchestra. For 10 points, name this birthplace of Toru Takemitsu, Mitsuko Uchida, and Seiji Ozawa.

ANSWER: Japan [accept Nihon-koku or Nippon-koku] (The schizo-electric piece is Takemitsus Quotation of Dream.) 

TOSSUP: 5. This is the first instrument to come in above the string tremolos at the opening of Szymanowskis first violin concerto. A set of five short pieces for this instrument and orchestra was one of Stravinskys first fully serialist work. Carmina Burana unusually requires two of these instruments, and Stravinsky required four of them in Les noces. Stravinskys concertante works for this instrument include his Capriccio, a set of (*) Movements, and a Concerto for it and winds. A virtuosic part for this instrument features prominently in the second scene of Petrushka, which was originally written as a concert piece for it. A whip crack begins Ravels G-major concerto for this instrument. Ludwig Wittgensteins brother Paul commissioned several pieces for this piece played only with the left hand. For 10 points, name this keyboard instrument.

ANSWER: pianofortes [do not accept or prompt on hurr durr the name of this set] 

TOSSUP: This composer has the singer repeatedly interrupt with triplet la la las in a song about Scaramouche and Pulcinella. This composer played piano on four recordings of his songs with soprano Mary Garden in 1904. An early song cycle by this composer ends with two watercolors, which include the song Green. This composer of Fantoches set a poem beginning It is languorous ecstasy and later used its title for his piano piece The Wind in the Plain. This composer used three (*) Symbolist poems by Pierre Louys for his cycle Chansons de Bilitis. Like Gabriel Faure, this composer set poems by Paul Verlaine in his Ariettes oubliees and Fetes galantes, and he wrote a piano piece inspired by a Verlaine poem about masques and bergamasques. For 10 points, name this French composer of Clair de Lune.

ANSWER: (Achille-)Claude Debussy 

TOSSUP: An archival track by this musician was based on the Vilja Song from Franz Lehars The Merry Widow. This musician frequently performed a composition with the same changes as So What called Impressions, but a studio recording of it did not surface until 2018. An early album by this artist ends with a track whose title puns on Tadd Damerons Lady Bird. The track Untitled Original 11383 appeared on a 2018 release of this musicians (*) Lost Album, called Both Directions at Once. This man played with Lee Morgan and Curtis Fuller on a hard bop album featuring the tracks Locomotion and Moments Notice. Alongside Cannonball Adderley, he played tenor sax on Kind of Blue. This musician paid homage to Paul Chambers in the song Mr. P.C., and used is first wifes nickname to title the track Naima. For 10 points, name this musician behind Giant Steps and A Love Supreme.

ANSWER: John (William) Coltrane JM

TOSSUP: A composer from this modern country used a swirl of violins and flutes around fast repeated notes in the trumpet to begin a 1955 symphony with the movements Lento, Poco Allegro, and Lento. That composer from this country titled his sixth and last symphony Fantaisies Symphoniques, and used jazz-inspired syncopated rhythms in his 1938 Double Concerto for Two String Orchestras, Piano, and Timpani. Another composer from this country had nine extra (*) trumpets play fanfares in the outer movements of a piece that derived from music for the Sokol Gymnastic Festival. That composer from this country included the organ solo Postludium in a mass, and wrote the string quartets Intimate Letters and The Kreutzer Sonata. The Glagolitic Mass and a 1926 Sinfonietta were written by a composer fromfor 10 pointswhat modern country home to Bohuslav Martinu and Leos Janacek?

ANSWER: Czech Republic 

TOSSUP: A genre of dance music from this country is characterized by augmented fourths and zabumba drums; that genre from this country was pioneered by accordionist and singer Luiz Gonzaga. A 1971 album whose title means construction mixed this countrys folk music with American-style pop and rock as part of a genre simply named popular music of this country. A psychedelic rock-influenced genre is exemplified by the 1968 debut album of a band whose name means the (*) mutants. A genre from this country that originated in the 19th century features a three-part rondo form and has a name meaning lament despite its often upbeat mood. This countrys popular music was introduced to the U.S. through a collaboration with saxophonist Stan Getz. For 10 points, name this home of the composers Joao Gilberto and Antonio Carlos Jobim, as well as the genres Tropicalia, choro, and bossa nova.

ANSWER: Federative Republic of Brazil [or Republica Federativa do Brasil; accept Musica popular brasileira] JM

TOSSUP: In a piece in this genre, two string instruments are tuned to natural harmonics of the bass player, and the oboist and clarinetists double on ocarinas. That piece in this genre adapts a melody from its composers own Musica ricercata in its second movement, Aria, Hoquetus, Chorale. The movements Rings, Paths, and Rounds appear in a Thomas Ades piece in this genre titled Concentric Paths. Jennifer Koh commissioned a (*) cadenza from John Zorn for one of these pieces by Gyorgy Ligeti. Another of these pieces uses a tone row that starts with a chain of ascending thirds and begins with the clarinet and harp going up and down the stacked fifths B-flat, F, C, G, which are echoed by the soloist as G, D, A, E. Jennifer Higdon wrote one of these pieces for Hilary Hahn, and Alban Berg dedicated his to the memory of an angel. For 10 points, what orchestral genre features the highest string instrument?

ANSWER: violin concertos [or violin concerti; prompt on partial answer] 

TOSSUP: In the recapitulation of a symphonys first movement, this note unusually resolves downward, prompting a modulation to the major supertonic of F. In that movement, this note is first played by the cellos, followed by a series of throbbing syncopated Gs in the first violins. After its quiet opening, the last movement of Beethovens Eighth is interrupted by all the strings and woodwinds holding out this pitch fortissimo. The main theme of the (*) Eroica symphonys first movement is interrupted by this unusually-spelled chromatic note. This notes minor key was used for the second of two sonatas titled quasi una fantasia. Beethovens fourteenth string quartet and piano sonata are both in this notes minor key. For 10 points, name this pitch that can also be written as D-flat.

ANSWER: C-sharp [accept D-flat until mentioned; do not accept or prompt on C] 

TOSSUP: Note to moderator: please read all of the sections in quotes slowly. A piece in this genre opens with the left hand outlining the bare fifth C-sharp, G-sharp, over which the right hand then plays a long E-natural, followed by repeated E-sharps. A D-flat-major piece in this genre begins with the right hand playing a dotted quarter F, followed by the descending eighths E-flat, D-flat, F, then a dotted quarter A-flat. At the end of a piece in this genre, the right hand rapidly repeats the four high notes: C-flat, B-flat, C natural, A natural. That piece was the second in a set of three pieces in this genre dedicated to Marie (*) Pleyel, and begins in E-flat Major and 12/8 time with the right hand rising from B-flat to G. Pieces in this genre were published as Frederic Chopins opuses 15, 27, and 9. Chopin used tempo markings like Lento or Andante for all but one of his works infor 10 pointswhat genre invented by John Field and inspired by the night?

ANSWER: nocturnes [accept nocturnes by Frederic Francois Chopin] 

TOSSUP: This number is the higher of the two that form the ratio of the simplest just intonation minor third. In figured bass, when notating a second or third inversion seventh chord, this number is commonly [emphasize] excluded. The scherzo movement of a symphony of this number begins with pounding A's in the tympani and basses before the horns and second violins play a pair of ascending D, E, F's emphasizing the E. Alexander Scriabin's 'Prometheus' chord has this many distinct notes. This number names a family of (*) augmented chords such as Italian, French and German. Most commonly, a deceptive cadence resolves on the scale degree of this number. Mahler's symphony of this number includes three hammer blows of fate, while Beethoven's symphony of this number includes a movement titled 'Scene by the brook'. For 10 points, give this number of Mahler's Tragic and Beethoven's Pastoral symphonies.

ANSWER: Six

TOSSUP: In the first movement of the first of these pieces, the soloist plays six mordents on B to open a section representing bird songs. In the first movement of the third of these works, descending F-major arpeggios from the soloist open a section labeled 'L'ubriaco,' or 'the drunkard.' The last of these works ends with 'Sirocco, Boreas, and all the winds in battle'; that piece uses pizzicato strings to depict (*) raindrops hitting windows, and dissonant violin intervals to represent teeth chattering. The composer of these works wrote sonnets to accompany them, such as one about a goatherd's dog. This set of works comprises the first third of The Contest Between Harmony and Invention. For 10 points, name this set of violin concertos by Antonio Vivaldi that begins with Spring and ends with Winter.

ANSWER: The Four Seasons [or Le quattro stagioni; prompt on Il cimento dell' armonia e dell' inventione or translations such as The Contest Between Harmony and Invention or The Trial of Harmony and Invention before 'Contest'; prompt on violin concertos by Vivaldi before 'concertos'; anti-prompt on individual seasons/movements]

TOSSUP: The theme and variation third movement of a work in this genre opens with the three pairs of descending quarter notes [read slowly] G-E-flat, E-flat-D, D-C. Friedrich Kuhlaus only foray into this genre, his Opus 7, was modeled on a Beethoven work in this genre that begins with four C major chords. A work in this genre begins with four note ascending runs under syncopated D-minor chords. Another work in this genre begins with a soft chord progression in the tonic key of G major before an immediate restatement in the key of B major. A work in this genre begins with a (*) tympani roll crescendo before the soloist enters on a forte A. That work in this genre by Grieg was influenced by an A-minor piece in this genre by Schumann. Beethoven's fifth work in this genre is nicknamed 'Emperor', while Ravel wrote a D major one for the left hand. For 10 points, name this genre featuring a solo keyboard instrument with orchestra.

ANSWER: piano concerto

TOSSUP: Near the end of another piece's second movement, this composer wrote 'Alliluya' on the top of a page; at the very end of the score, he wrote 'I thank thee, Lord.' In a piece by this composer for piano and orchestra, the pianist begins this 16th-note-rhythm melody on beat three of the second-measure: [read slowly] A-flat, down to F, up to G-flat, up to A-flat, down to D-flat. A work by this composer opens with a loud and long F-minor chord in the piano followed by a single very low F. Both that C-minor piano concerto and a C-sharp minor prelude by this composer opens with (*) bell like chords. This composer included a prominent alto saxophone part in his Symphonic Dances. This composer used an Italian composer's 24th caprice for solo violin as the theme in a piece for piano and orchestra with 24 variations. For 10 points, name this Russian composer of Isle of the Dead and Rhapsody on a Theme of Paganini.

ANSWER: Sergei (Vasilievich) Rachmaninoff

TOSSUP: In a work by this composer - one of his collaborations with lyricist Salomo Franck - the soprano soloist declares in a cheerful D-major recitative that 'to cuddle in playful tenderness is better than Flora's fading delights.' That recitative, 'Sich uben (OO-ben) im Lieben,' is from a piece by this composer for solo soprano, solo oboe, and continuo, 'Weichet (VEICH-et) nur, betrubte (be-troob-teh) Schatten.' Dame Myra Hess wrote a piano transcription of the tenth and final movement of this composer's Herz (hairtz) und Mund und Tat und Leben, (*) 'Jesus bleibet meine Freude'. This composer's other cantatas include ones titled Sleepers Wake and one titled after Coffee. Felix Mendelssohn was a key figure in reviving many of this composer's works including the St. Matthew Passion. For 10 points, name this German baroque composer of the Brandenburg Concertos and Toccata and Fugue in D minor.

ANSWER: Johann Sebastian Bach [prompt on Bach]

TOSSUP: The rondo theme of a work in this genre opens with the eighth note melody [read slowly] C, B, C, D, C, B-flat, A, followed by three quarter note A's. The first movement of one of these works, which was dedicated to Jacques Thibaud (tee-BOW), is subtitled 'Obsession.' Another work of this genre by the same composer features a first bar that is scored in 4/4 time but contains 82 beats. That piece in this form is the one movement 'Ballade' (bah-lahd) by (*) Eugene Ysaye (e-sigh). One work of this type was marked for 'un mulattico lunatico', referring to its original dedicatee George Bridgetower. A collection of fifteen of these pieces each require a different tuning, is accompanied by one of the 'Mysteries from the Rosary', and is by Heinrich Biber. For 10 points, Beethoven's 'Spring' and 'Kreutzer' are what type of composition, written for a high-pitched string instrument, and often accompanied by piano.

ANSWER: violin sonata [prompt on sonata]

TOSSUP: The third movement of a G-minor work for this instrument and piano is a Largo in 3/2 time, which is only 27 measures long. That work, dedicated to a player of this instrument named Auguste Franchomme, was the last major composition of Chopin. This is the solo instrument in a piece that was altered by the man who premiered it, Wilhelm Fitzenhagen. A concerto for this instrument includes an elegy for Josefina Kounicova based on its composer's song 'Leave me alone'. That concerto was dedicated to Hanus Wihan and was likely based on a concerto for the same instrument by (*) Victor Herbert. This is the solo instrument in Tchaikovsky's Variations on a Rococo Theme. J.S. Bach wrote six unaccompanied suites for this instrument. Elgar wrote a E-minor concerto for this instrument that was popularized by Jacqueline du Pre. For 10 points, name this instrument played Yo-Yo-Ma.

ANSWER: violoncello Bonuses:

TOSSUP: A composer from this country wrote a solo piece in which the right hand enters with the following quarter note dyads: [read slowly] E-flat-G, C-E-flat, E-flat-G. Another piano suite by that composer, titled for a painter from this country, includes a piece that ends with several cycles of Vivace 32nd notes and Lento trills representing the title bird that a girl sings a duet with; that is (*) 'The Maiden and the Nightingale.' One of its native sons wrote a piano piece depicting the Gypsy quarter Triana. Another composer from this country wrote a ballet that includes a 'Dance of Terror' and a 'Ritual Fire Dance.' That composer of Love, the Magician also wrote Nights in the Gardens of [this country]. For 10 points, what home country of Enrique Granados and Manuel de Falla (FEYE-uh) did Isaac Albeniz depict in Iberia?

ANSWER: Kingdom of Spain [or Reino de Espana; accept 12 Spanish Dances or 12 danzas espanolas; accept Nights in the Gardens of Spain or Noches en los jardines de Espana]

TOSSUP: This composer marketed one set of string quartets to potential patrons as written in a 'new and special' way. A quartet in that Opus 33 has a melody in its Rondo - Presto finale derived from a Slavonic folk tune, has the first violin enter in the first movement on sustained G's, and gets its nickname from the chirping grace-notes it uses throughout; that quartet, 'The Bird,' joins quartets such as (*) 'The Joke' in this composer's 'Russian' quartets. This composer wrote the melody that became 'Deutschland, Deutschland uber alles,' and used it as a theme for variations in his 'Emperor Quartet.' He was the dedicatee of sets of string quartets by both Beethoven and Mozart. For 10 points, what 'Father of the String Quartet' and 'Father of the Symphony' composed the Surprise Symphony?

ANSWER: Franz Joseph 'Papa' Haydn

TOSSUP: In each of the first five measures of a piano piece by this composer, the right hand trills between C-sharp and D-sharp before playing 32nd notes. This composer wrote a piano piece in 4/8 time that opens with the left hand playing a D-flat-A-flat interval. The opening motif of that piece by this composer was described as 'a little circle in water with a little pebble falling into it.' This composer of 'Reflections in the Water' and 'The Joyous Isle' ended a piano suite with a syncopated piece named after a minstrel show-inspired black doll. (*) 'The Snow is Dancing' and 'Serenade of the Doll' are movements in a suite by this composer whose opening movement is named for a text by Johann Fux. That movement, 'Doctor Gradus ad Parnassum', opens his Children's Corner. This composer also wrote a symphonic poem that begins with a solo flute playing a descending then ascending chromatic pattern. For 10 points, name this composer of 'Clair de lune' and Prelude to the Afternoon of a Faun.

ANSWER: Claude Debussy

TOSSUP: Along with the tympani, this instrument's only appearance in Faure's Requiem is during the Libera Me section. In one concerto, this instrument opens with the ascending notes [read slowly] B-flat, D, F, A, B-flat and is accompanied by three clarinets playing a B-flat major chord in triplets. A group of these instruments play the opening section of Verdi's overture to Nabucco and the first forte section 37 bars into Wagner's overture to Tannhauser (Tawn-hoy-ser). This instrument plays an arpeggiated B-flat chord to open the (*) Tuba Mirum section of Mozart's Requiem. The modern incarnation of this instrument, whose older relatives include the sackbut, is said to have made its orchestral debut along with the piccolo in the fourth movement of Beethoven's 5th symphony. For 10 points, name this brass instrument played by adjusting a slide.

ANSWER: trombone

TOSSUP: A female aria by this composer begins with a long sustained E-flat followed by a short and a long low E-flat before calling its subject a 'mighty monster'. An opera overture by this composer begins with a D-E-F-sharp horn call motif that appears throughout the opera. The notes A up to D, followed by a quick five note D-major scale ascent begins the melody of a male choral number from an opera by this composer. This composer's grandson worked with Mahler to complete his unfinished opera (*) The Three Pintos. An opera by this composer begins in the court of Louis VI with Count Adolar singing about his engagement to the title character. This is the original composer for the ballet Le Spectre de la rose, though that ballet uses Berlioz's orchestration. Another opera by this composer includes a dark scene in the Wolf's Glen and revolves around magic bullets owned by the sharpshooter Max. For 10 points, name this German composer of the operas Oberon, Euryanthe and Der Freischutz.

ANSWER: Carl Maria von Weber

TOSSUP: A piece in this key begins with sforzando octaves of the dominant note before a series of six rapid chromatically ascending first inversion chords back up to the dominant. A symphony whose first movement begins in this key has a lyrical second movement trio theme to be played like 'something you hear down by the river' within an F sharp minor scherzo in 1/2 (one-two) time. A symphony in this key was initially conceived as an homage to Charles Gordon, but that plan was scrapped and the work dedicated to Hans Richter. A section marked (*) 'Andante. Nobilmente e semplice' opens the only commonly performed symphony in this key, Elgar's first. This major key is the subdominant of the relative major of C minor, leading it to be used for Beethoven's slow movements such as in his 'Pathetique' sonata. This major key's relative minor is F minor and its dominant chord is E-flat major. For 10 points, name this major key whose key signature has four flats.

ANSWER: A-flat major [major is not needed after mentioned; prompt on just A-flat otherwise]

TOSSUP: The penultimate movement of this work begins [read slowly] unison F-sharp, G, a bar of rest, and then a quicker F-sharp, F-sharp, G. The final movement of this work opens with a block chord melody that begins long E-flat, F, G, short E-flat, G, long F, low B-flat and starts without pause following a movement that begins Allegro con brio, feroce. This work's first movement opens with the unaccompanied line of quarter notes G, down to F, up to B-flat, and then eighth notes C and high F. That opening theme is reprised in minor in a section marked (*) 'Con mortuis in lingua mortua.' Another movement of this work is subtitled 'Children's Quarrel after Games.' This work was directly inspired by the art of Viktor Hartmann. This work's movements, such as ones titled 'Hut on Fowl's Legs' and 'Great Gate of Kiev', are separated with Promenades. Ravel famously orchestrated, for 10 points, which piano suite by Modest Mussorgsky?

ANSWER: Pictures at an Exhibition

TOSSUP: A section of one piece by this jazz musician ends with a D-flat-13 chord with raised 11th; the piece then returns to its first theme by echoing the opening triplet-rhythm [read slowly] low notes F-sharp, G, C. That piece, 'The Duke,' was this man's tribute to both Duke Ellington and his teac]er Darius Milhaud (mi-YODE), and appears on his album (*) Jazz: Red Hot and Cool. Another piece by this man, which he picked up from street musicians while abroad, uses the following four-measure rhythm cycle: three measures of eighth notes grouped into 2+2+2+3, then a measure of 3+3+3. That piece in 9/8 time appears with a Paul Desmond piece in 5/4 time - which is the best-selling jazz single of all time - on this man's album Time Out. For 10 points, name this jazz pianist behind 'Blue Rondo a la Turk' and 'Take Five.'

ANSWER: (David Warren) Dave Brubeck

TOSSUP: NOTE TO PLAYER: composer and type of work required. A bassoon solo in one of these works is a waltz that begins with three repeated patterns of the notes [read slowly] B, D, C-sharp, long A-sharp before a descending series of large syncopated jumps. A horn solo in a 12/8 (twelve-eight) movement of one these works begins with the descending eighth [read slowly] notes D, C-sharp, B, up to a dotted quarter D, down to a dotted half C-sharp. That movement of one of these works is to be played 'Andante cantabile, con alcuna licenza'. One of these works uses the tune (*) 'In the Field Stood a Birch Tree' in its fourth movement while another one of these works contains a movement titled 'Land of Desolation, Land of Mists.' The fourth one of these works opens with a unison A-flat fate motif in the brass. An unnumbered one of these works is named for Lord Byron's poem Manfred. For 10 points, name these orchestral works which include ones nicknamed 'Winter Dreams' and 'Pathetique.'

ANSWER: symphonies by Tchaikovsky [prompt on partial answer]

TOSSUP: Songs by a composer from this country are collected in the volume A Pilgrim's Solace. That composer from this country also wrote a set of 21 pieces scored for five viols and a lute, his Lachrimae. Another composer from this country wrote a piece for Catholic masses, Gradualia, and collaborated with his teacher on Cantiones Sacrae. That teacher from this country may have composed one piece in order to one-up Alessandro Striggio's Ecce Beatam Lucem, or to celebrate the birthday of a (*) queen of this country. That piece, a motet whose 40 voices are divided into eight choirs of five, has a title meaning 'Hope in any other,' Spem in alium. For 10 points, name this home country of Thomas Tallis, the subject of variations by a later composer from here, Ralph (RAFE) Vaughan Williams.

ANSWER: England [accept Great Britain or United Kingdom of Great Britain and (Northern) Ireland]

TOSSUP: This musician played organ on an album that opens with the 32-minute long 'He Loved Him Madly.'After the addition of unfinished recordings to his bossa nova-inspired album Quiet Nights, this musician refused to speak to his producer Teo Macero for three years. He included the tuba player Bill Barber in a nonet that recorded Gerry Mulligan's song (*) 'Jeru.' While this musician was supposed to be attending Julliard, he spent most of his time jamming with his roommate, Charlie Parker. He turned his quintet into a sextet by adding a second saxophonist, Cannonball Adderley. That sextet recorded a song that opens with a bass solo by Paul Chambers; that song is 'So What.' For 10 points, name this jazz trumpeter behind Birth of the Cool and Kind of Blue.

ANSWER: Miles Dewey Davis III

TOSSUP: A 3/8 scherzo by this composer uses the rhythmic motif of LONG, short, short, short, short, LONG, LONG, LONG. Gustav, Prince of Vasa was the dedicatee of this composer's three opus 44 string quartets, while another one of his string quartets uses the song 'Ist es wahr' as a cyclic motif. In a work by this composer, trumpets play short, short, short, long C's before the same rhythm builds up a C-major chord. This composer was influenced by a Beethoven cantata about a Goethe poem to write (*) Calm Sea and Prosperous Voyage. A suite by this composer includes the vocal numbers 'Through this house give glimmering light' and 'Ye Spotted Snakes.' This composer's trips to the British Isles led to his composition of the Scottish Symphony and the Hebrides overture. For 10 points, name this composer who wrote incidental music to Shakespeare's Midsummer Night's Dream and the Italian Symphony.

ANSWER: Felix Mendelssohn

TOSSUP: This composers so-called opera A Hand of Bridge consists of four characters, who each sing an aria about their inner thoughts while playing the titular game. The first movement of this composers piano concerto begins with a cadenza for the soloist, while the flute introduces the theme of the second-movement Canzone. The second movement of this composers Second Symphony was excerpted as the tone poem Night Flight, whereas this composers First Symphony synthesizes the four movements of a classical symphony into one movement. The second movement of his (*) String Quartet was excerpted as a standalone piece that was played during the announcement of JFKs funeral. For 10 points, name this American composer of Adagio for Strings.

ANSWER: Samuel Barber

TOSSUP: This composers early pieces for violin and guitar include a sonata concertata and 14 variations on the French revolutionary song LaCarmagnole. The theme of the last piece in this composers Opus1 begins [read slowly] longA, short AACBA, then highE. This composers LeStreghe is a set of variations based on the popular Witches Dance from a ballet by Franz Sussmayr. The third movement rondo of this composers Violin Concerto No.2 in Bminor is (*) nicknamed, due to its repeatedly ringing F-sharps, La Clochette or La Campanella. This gaunt composer with a meaty ravioli recipe cultivated legends about his devilry and unmatched technical ability. Themes by this composer inspired six piano etudes by Liszt and a Rhapsody by Sergei Rachmaninoff. For 10 points, name this first great Romantic virtuoso who composed 24 caprices for violin.

ANSWER: Niccolo Paganini JS, 

TOSSUP: In 1963, John Coltrane and this musician recorded a track he composed whose original Dminor versions bridge repeats a D-flatmajor 1625 chord progression, and whose melody opens like Gershwins Someone to Watch Over Me with a rising 6-note Fmajor pentatonic pickup and long highG. Lorenzo Tios Mexican Blues inspired a standard he wrote with Barney Bigard that swapped the trombone and clarinets registers to create a mike-tone. Early in his career, his bands signature song was East St.Louis Toodle-Oo, an example of his (*) jungle music. His career was revived after he had Paul Gonsalves play a 27-bar saxophone solo during a performance of Diminuendo and Crescendo in Blue at the 1956 Newport Jazz Festival. He composed the standards In a Sentimental Mood and Mood Indigo. For 10 points, name this jazz pianist who often performed Billy Strayhorns Take the A Train.

ANSWER: Duke Ellington [or Edward Kennedy Ellington]

TOSSUP: Guido Agosti arranged three movements of this ballet for piano, and Kazuhito Yamashita transcribed it for guitar. According to Taruskin, the leit-harmonie (light-harmony) of an evil character in this ballet alternates major and minor thirds. Low strings open this through-composed ballet in A-flat minor by slowly repeating A-flatF-flatE-flatDFG before a natural-harmonic glissando reveals a magic garden. This ballet ends with a brass chorale in 7/4time after the Princesses dance a (*) Khorovod. This ballets 1919 suite includes a Berceuse (bair-SUZZ) featuring a low bassoon solo over harp. Many 80s pop songs sample the orchestral hit onA andE that opens this ballets Infernal Dance. In this ballet commissioned by Diaghilev (dee-AH-ghee-lev), Ivan Tsarevich summons the title character with her feather to shatter an egg, destroying Kashchei (kuh-SHAY) the Immortal. For 10 points, name this first ballet by Igor Stravinsky.

ANSWER: The Firebird [or Zhar-ptitsa]

TOSSUP: A player of this instrument collaborated with Duke Ellington and Charles Mingus on the tracks Very Special and Fleurette Africaine for the album Money Jungle. That musicians wife Abbey Lincoln screams over the sound of this instrument for over a minute on the track Triptych from Freedom Now Suite. A player of this instrument, who was secretly recorded yelling obscenities at band members on his tour bus, often ended concerts with his (*) West Side Story Medley. Max Roach played this instrument, which is given a prominent solo on Benny Goodmans 1938 recording of Sing,Sing,Sing. In cool jazz, this instrument is often played with brushes. For 10 points, Buddy Rich and Gene Krupa played what percussion instrument usually played with two sticks?

ANSWER: drums [or drum set; prompt on percussion]

TOSSUP: A composer with this surname used a melody from Miklos Rozsas (MEEK-lohsh RO-zhaws) score for The Killers in his theme for the show Dragnet. A composer with this surname wrote an Opus17 Piano Trio in Gminor whose third movement scherzo (SKAIRT-soh) uses a Scotch snap rhythm. That composer with this surname premiered Brahmss Variations and Fugue on a Theme by Handel. Brahms and that composer both wrote variations on the sad F-sharpminor fourth piece from Bunte Blatter (BOON-tuh BLEH-tuh) by a composer with this surname. That composer wrote a symphony whose fourth movement in the parallel key of E-flat minor opens with a brass (*) chorale of trombones and horns playing a series of rising fourths, has five movements, and was inspired by the coronation of an archbishop at the Cologne Cathedral. For 10 points, give this surname shared by the composer of the Rhenish Symphony, Robert, and his wife Clara.

ANSWER: Schumann [accept Robert Schumann or Clara Schumann or Walter Schumann; prompt on Wieck]

TOSSUP: A player of this instrument collaborated with Philip Glass on the album Passages. Electric versions of this instrument rely on a buzz bridge. At the 1966 Bath Music Festival, a virtuoso of this instrument recorded the album East Meets West with Yehudi Menuhin (yeh-HOO-dee MEN-yoo-in). In order to play an extra seven semitones, players bend a string across this instruments movable arched frets in a technique called meend. This instruments three primary strokes are named (*) da, ra, and dir, and its sympathetic strings must be retuned to play different ragas. The Beatles George Harrison studied under the best-known player of this instrument who composed the score for Satyajit Rays Apu Trilogy. Ravi Shankar popularized, for 10 points, what droning gourd-shaped Hindustani instrument?

ANSWER: sitar

TOSSUP: Joaquin Rodrigo based a 10-movement concerto for two guitars on a sad piece of this type ironically titled Oh, my happy eyes. Orlando Gibbons based a piece of this type about a silver swan on Jacques Arcadelts Il bianco e dolce cigno (eel bYAHN-ko ay DOLE-chay CHEEN-yo). Vocalists overlap the word ahi (AH-ee) at the end of a piece of this type full of chromatic mediants from the last of six books of them written after leaving Ferrara and inspired by the composers adulterous wife titled (*) Moro, lasso. Giovanni Artusi criticized the composer of pieces of this type such as Cruda Amarilli for his monody-rich seconda pratica style. That composer divided his eighth book of these pieces into songs of war and songs of love. Many of these pieces by Carlo Gesualdo (jezz-WALL-doh) and Claudio Monteverdi have elaborate wordpainting. For 10 points, name these secular sung poems contrasted with motets.

ANSWER: madrigals

TOSSUP: This text inspired Wyschnegradskys symphony for four quarter-tone pianos and Boulezs (boo-LEZZs) 1974 incidental music for Barraults (bah-ROs) theater. Frederick Deliuss (DEE-lee-uss) long cantata A Mass of Life sets this text. The 1902 Budapest premiere of a piece based on this text inspired Bela Bartoks early tone poem Kossuth (KOH-shoot). Gustav Mahler planned to title his Third Symphony after this book, and an alto solo in its slow fourth movement sets the (*) Midnight Song. A tone poem based on this book features a fugue on all 12 pitches in the movement Of Science, an unresolved Bmajor and Cmajor conflict, a world riddle, and a rising CGC brass fanfare, or dawn motif, that opens 2001:A Space Odyssey. For 10 points, name this philosophical text by Friedrich Nietzsche (NEE-chuh) that Richard Strauss adapted into a tone poem.

ANSWER: Also sprach Zarathustra (ALL-zoh shprock tsah-rah-TOOS-trah) [or Thus Spoke Zarathustra or Thus Spake Zarathustra; or Ainsi parlait Zarathoustra or Ainsi parla Zarathoustra; accept Zoroaster in place of Zarathustra; prompt on Zarathustra]  

TOSSUP: This composer wrote the virtuoso sacred motet In furore iustissimae irae. A 12-section choral work by this composer opens with trumpet, oboe, and strings leaping between two octave Ds in a lowhighlowlow pattern and was lost until the 1920s. Cellos open a piece by this composer with a bar of slow staccato eighth notes on F, then higher strings join in each successive bar to build up the chord F, G, D-flat, and B-flat with quick mordents. In 1939, Alfredo Casella popularized this composers setting of the (*) Gloria in D major. This composers Mandolin Concerto in Cmajor is often paired with four concerti grossi he published with sonnets. Rapid ascending minor scales and tremolos depict thunderstorms in the first two works in this composers collection The Contest Between Harmony and Invention. For 10 points, name this Italian Baroque composer of The Four Seasons.

ANSWER: Antonio Vivaldi

TOSSUP: George Crumb drew on the frescoes in the Arena Chapel to compose a little suite for this time period, whose music inspired Ralph Vaughan Williamss cantata Hodie (HO-dee-ay). The timpani unusually open a festive cantata written for this time period, Jauchzet, frohlocket! (YOWKH-tsit FRO-lock-it). Songs from this time inspired a ceremony composed by Benjamin Britten. This time titles a work whose sixth and final movement is a 12/8-time Pastorale ad libitum. That work is its composers (*) Concerto Grosso Opus6, No.8. Its not Easter, but this time period inspired an oratorio by J.S. Bach that is actually six cantatas. This time of year titles the most famous concerto of Arcangelo Corelli. Handels Messiah is often performed during, for 10 points, what holiday whose celebration involves singing carols?

ANSWER: Christmas [or Christmas Day or Christmas Eve; accept Christmas Oratorio or Christmas Concerto]

TOSSUP: In the fifth movement of a long, unusual piece in this genre, a male choir sings text from Adam Oehlenschlagers (AY-dum UH-len-SHLAY-urs) Aladdin. Ferdinand Hiller conducted the premiere of a piece in this genre with a cryptogrammic CBAA motif after a pregnant Clara urged Robert Schumann to expand his Phantasie in Aminor by two movements. Before Leonard Bernstein (BURN-styne) conducted a piece in this genre, he controversially stated that the exceptionally (*) slow tempi were not suggested by him. Brahms joked that the dark second movement of his second piece in this genre was a tiny little wisp of a scherzo. The composer who wrote a heavier ossia cadenza for one piece in this genre and dedicated another to his hypnotherapist Nikolai Dahl was Sergei Rachmaninoff. For 10 points, name this type of piece that Lang Lang might play alongside an orchestra.

ANSWER: piano concertos [or piano concerti; prompt on concerto or concerti] (The first clue is about Busoni.)  

TOSSUP: Chromaticism abounds in this classical symphony, as its first movements development begins with a series of sinking half-step modulations with F-sharp minor first, and its finales development begins with a halting, jagged passage that uses every pitch but the tonic. In the opening of this symphonys finale, which is its third movement to be in sonata form, quick, loud tutti chords on 515151 answer the violins soft Mannheim rockets. This symphony opens with low strings chugging below the violins agitated, thrice-repeated sigh E-flatDD. (*) This symphony is linked to storm and stress due to its key and the composers turmoil, debt, and misfortune as, despite a burst of inspiration, plans to premiere his last 3 symphonies in summer 1788 fell through. Symphony No.25 is the Little counterpart of this second of twominor-key symphonies by its composer, which precedes the Jupiter Symphony. For 10 points, name this second-to-last symphony by Mozart.

ANSWER: Symphony No. 40 by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart [or Mozart 40; or Great G minor Symphony; accept Groe g-Moll-Sinfonie; accept K. 550 or KV 550; prompt on partial answer, but accept 40 after Mozart is read; prompt on Symphony in G minor by Mozart; prompt on Mozarts penultimate symphony]

TOSSUP: The final section of this composers oratorio begins Welten singen Dank und Ehre (VELT-in ZING-in DONK oont AY-ruh), and is often performed as a Hallelujah Chorus. Warlike drums and trumpets twice interrupt the Bminor Agnus Dei of a mass above whose middle section this composer wrote Prayer for inner and outer peace. He reused his song Gegenliebe (GAY-gun-LEE-buh) for a fantasy whose long solo piano intro modulates from Cminor to Cmajor. A mighty 4/4 fugue accompanies the words In gloria Dei patris, Amen in his second mass, in (*) Dmajor, whose Gloria and Sanctus were posthumously premiered in Russia thanks to his patron Prince Galitzin. He composed one oratorio, Christ on the Mount of Olives, premiered his own Choral Fantasy, and revised and set Schillers poem An die Freude (on dee FROY-duh). For 10 points, name this composer of the Missa Solemnis and the Choral Ninth Symphony.

ANSWER: Ludwig van Beethoven

TOSSUP: Percy Grainger adapted a movement from a work of this type for his Blithe Bells; that work of this type features a soprano soloist accompanied by two recorders. An adaptation of a score [emphasize] into a work of this type by Prokofiev contains movements such as The Field of the Dead and was reworked from his film score for Alexander Nevsky. A work of this type contains a chorale based on a hymn by Philipp Nicolai and is entitled (*) Wachet auf (VAH-khet OWFF), or Sleepers Awake. A secular one of these pieces opens with the line Be still, stop chattering!and one of them nicknamed for hunting contains an aria played at many weddings titled Sheep May Safely Graze. For 10 points, J.S.Bach wrote over 200 of what type of choral works, whose examples include one titled for coffee?

ANSWER: cantatas [accept sacred cantatas or secular cantatas]

TOSSUP: Composer and genre required. The composers friend Charles Hoffmann suggested the simple, lento four-bar introduction to one of these pieces whose abrupt allegro con brio sections noodly runs over Aminor triads outline a long, descending chromatic scale. The right hands fortissimo Gdominantseventh chord opens the twelfth of these pieces before the left hand plays stormy descending sixteenth notes. The first complete edition published by Alfred Cortot prefaces these pieces with copious (*) workouts for isolating difficulties. Besides the three new ones, they were published as Opus10 and Opus25. One of them opens with quick, dissonant minor seconds as if played by accident. These pieces include Winter Wind and one inspired by the November Uprising. For 10 points, name these pedagogical piano pieces, such as Wrong Note and Revolutionary, by a Polish composer.

ANSWER: piano etudes by Frederic Chopin [prompt on partial answer; prompt on studies in place of etudes]

TOSSUP: This region names an orchestral triptych with popular appeal, later arranged for band, whose movements When Jesus Wept and Chester are based on William Billings hymns; that piece is by William Schuman. Walter Piston wrote 3 Sketches and Edward MacDowell wrote 10 Idyls (idles) titled for this region; he, Horatio Parker, and Amy Beach were composers of this regions second school. This region titles a triptych whose second movement opens with loud falling chromatic scales over cymbals, quotes patriotic (*) marching band tunes in different keys and meters, and ends with the Star-Spangled Banner resolving to a dissonant chord. Putnams Camp is the second movement of Charles Ivess Orchestral Set No.1, which is titled after three places in this region whose writers inspired Ivess Concord Sonata. For 10 points, name this region home to Tanglewood Music Center and the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

ANSWER: New England [accept New England Triptych or Second New England School or Three Places in New England or New England Idyls or Three New England Sketches; prompt on United States or the Northeast]

TOSSUP: In Sibeliuss (sih-BAY-lee-uss) Pelleas et Melisande (pay-lay-OSS ay may-lee-ZOND), this instrument portrays Melisande. A French critic mistakenly invokes Haydn as a precedent for why this transposing instrument doesnt belong in a symphony, but solos for it open Vincent dIndys (van-SAWN dan-DEEs) Symphony on a French Mountain Air and the second movement of Cesar Francks (say-zar fronks) Symphony in Dminor. This instruments mordent F-sharpEF-sharp after four guitar strums opens the second movement of (*) Rodrigos Concierto de Aranjuez (kon-see-AIR-toh de ah-rahn-WEZZ). This instrument portrays oriental merchants in Borodins In the Steppes of Central Asia and the title bird in Sibeliuss The Swan of Tuonela. A melody that was adapted into the spiritual Goin Home was played by this instrument at the opening of the Largo second movement of Dvoraks New World Symphony. For 10 points, name this double-reed woodwind instrument pitched a fifth lower than the oboe.

ANSWER: English horn [or cor anglais; do not accept or prompt on horn or French horn]

TOSSUP: Before Allen Forte, this composer introduced an early method of set theory in his treatise Harmonic Materials of Modern Music. Hes not Vaughan Williams, but this man set three ocean-themed Walt Whitman poems in his seventh and last symphony. In the 1920s and 1930s, this man hosted an NBC radio series highlighting works by American composers, titled Pioneers in Music. A love duet between Marigold and Bradford is followed by a (*) Maypole Dance in a suite derived from this composers only opera. This composer decided not to sue 20th Century Fox for the unauthorized use of a D-flat major symphony by him in the credits of Alien. The Interlochen Arts Camp theme is taken from that symphony by this composer of Merry Mount, who served for forty years as head of the Eastman School of Music. For 10 points, name this American composer of a Romantic Second Symphony.

ANSWER: Howard Hanson 

TOSSUP: The inscription on the score of a piece titled for this genre states that the piece was bornof our basic desire to draw a line from one point to another. A piece in this genre begins with the strings repeatedly playing long As before more strings join in on dissonant notes, many of which are semitonal. The first movement of a piece titled for this genre begins with the phrase to the side being repeated. The bass guitar, electric guitar, and harpsichord are featured in Krzysztof Pendereckis [SHISH-toff pen-der-RET-skis] 1971 work in this genre, which also titles a 2012 piece that is made up of movements named for (*) Baroque dances, such as Allemande. That piece titled for this genre won the 2013 Pulitzer Prize for Music, was written for the vocal group Roomful of Teeth, and was composed by Caroline Shaw for 8 Voices. For 10 points, name this genre, a type of Baroque suite, whose name comes from the Italian for divided.

ANSWER: partita [or partie or partia or parthia or parthie; accept Partita for Harpsichord and Orchestra or Partita for Harpsichord, Electric Guitar, Bass Guitar, Harp, Double Bass, and Chamber Orchestra; accept Partita for 8 Voices] 

TOSSUP: NOTE: all word forms acceptable. A work with this title adjective was originally intended as part of a trilogy symbolizing the brotherhood of Slovakia, Romania, and Hungary, and paraphrases Bachs St. Matthew Passion after opening with an ascending D undertone scale in the strings. A dance with this title adjective is a D-major waltz that is paired with a hymn-like movement in F major and 3/2 time in a work written in France in 1904. In a work described by this word, a chorus repeats No, they will not return after a son explains to his father that he is unable to drink from a cup but only from a clear mountain (*) spring. This adjective titles the second of two dances written specially for Gustave Lyons chromatic harp. A choral work described by this word describes how nine brothers wander into the woods and are turned into stags. For 10 points, what word titles a Bela Bartok cantata and a dance that Debussy paired with a sacred dance?

ANSWER: profane [or profana; or Cantata Profana, prompt on Sacred and Profane Dances, or Danses sacree et profane, do not accept or prompt on sacred] 

TOSSUP: This musician solos over Martin Luther Kings I Have a Dream speech at the opening of his album Chattahoochee Red. With his then-wife Abbey Lincoln and Oscar Brown, this musician composed a piece to be performed for the centennial of the Emancipation Proclamation, titled We Insist!, also known as his Freedom Now Suite. After the deaths of Richie Powell and Clifford Brown, this musician released an album titled after himself + 4. A short solo by this musician opens the version of Hot House on Jazz at Massey Hall; at that performance, this musician also played in a trio with Bud Powell and Charles (*) Mingus. A calypso-inspired pattern by this musician opens Sonny Rollinss St. Thomas. Along with Kenny Clarke, this musician referred to his use of accented bass notes as dropping bombs while keeping time on the ride cymbal. For 10 points, name this pioneering bebop drummer.

ANSWER: Max Roach [or Maxwell Lemuel Roach] 

TOSSUP: Keith Emersons thirteen-year-old grandson Ethan recorded Keiths The Dreamer with this orchestra on a 2018 tribute album conducted by Terje Mikkelsen. With this orchestra, Anthony Marwood recorded the violin concerto of Sally Beamish, who in 2018 was named this orchestras first composer in residence. Its second music director conducted the orchestra from the violin section, until rheumatoid arthritis in her wrists forced her to stop playing in 1998. (*) Iona Brown directed this orchestra, for which Christopher Hogwood played continuo, before he left due to its practice of performing early music on modern instruments. This orchestra recorded popular Mozart selections for the film Amadeus under its founder, Neville Marriner, who named it after the London church in which it performed. For 10 points, name this chamber orchestra that, despite its name, is not a school in the countryside.

ANSWER: The Academy of St.-Martin-in-the-Fields [or the ASMF; prompt on St.-Martin-in-the-Fields] 

TOSSUP: NOTE: Composer and type of piece required.Peter Stadlen compared Felix Weingartners recording of these pieces to good lean beef. During the mid-2000s, a website attempting to analyze all available recordings of the third of these works was maintained by Eric Grunin. The opening of one of these works plays briefly as the Magistrates police come to arrest the Miller in Manuel de Fallas The Three Cornered Hat. A slow 1951 recording of one of these works by this composer is why the modern CD is 74 (*) minutes long. The fifth and seventh of these pieces were played by the Vienna Philharmonic in a landmark 1976 recording by Carlos Kleiber. Herbert von Karajan conducted four cycles of these works. After the fall of the Berlin Wall, Leonard Bernstein conducted the final one of them, replacing the word joy with freedom. For 10 points, name these pieces by this composer, including ones nicknamed Pastoral and Eroica.

ANSWER: symphonies by Ludwig van Beethoven [prompt on symphonies or Ludwig van Beethoven; both answers are needed] 

TOSSUP: A 1975 piece with this title opens with octave Cs in both hands, and has second and third sections titled Ciacona and Quasi Corale respectively. That work, Wolfgang Rihms fifth work with this title, is nicknamed Tombeau. The first of three movements written in 1909, each designated by this word, begins with a descending B, G-sharp, G melody, and then a G-flat, F, B-natural trichord. Thirteen musical parameters were arranged in seven scales in the last of a series of six pieces each with this title, planned with a six-by-six matrix. In another piece with this title, the player works through (*) 19 fragments in any order, until one is repeated three times. Schoenbergs only full use of free atonality in a keyboard work is found in his three pieces of this title, his Opus 11. Karlheinz Stockhausen wrote a series of 19 keyboard works with this name. For 10 points, name this word, which is just German for piano piece.

ANSWER: Klavierstucke [prompt on piano pieces by saying say that in the original language] 

TOSSUP: This composer invented a Super-Just Harmonic scale, and used it in pieces titled Yusae-Aisae [you say - I say] and Just Imaginings. This composer invented two non-octave-repeating scales which split a perfect fifth into eleven and nine equal parts respectively, called Beta and Alpha. A 1972 proto-ambient album by this composer incorporated field recordings that portray the four seasons. Rachel Elkind frequently collaborated with this composer of Sonic Seasonings, who used Purcells Music for the (*) Funeral of Queen Mary as the basis for the main theme of a score that replaced real vocalists with a vocoder in a remix of Ode to Joy. She collaborated closely with Robert Moog on an album of synthesized J.S. Bach compositions titled Switched on Bach. For 10 points, name this composer of early electronic music, who worked with Stanley Kubrick on the scores to The Shining and A Clockwork Orange.

ANSWER: Wendy Carlos 

TOSSUP: A composer from this country used pounding timpani followed by a piano ostinato and jazzy brass rips to begin his 1947 piece Furioso for orchestra. Juliane Banse, who spent her early career as a soloist in this country, premiered the title role of an operatic, postmodernist retelling of Snow White from this country. A composer from this country wrote six ballades for various solo instruments and orchestra, and waited forty years to authorize the premiere of his Mass for Double Chorus. Rolf (*) Liebermann was from this country. A French-born composer from this country concluded his third symphony with a Dona nobis pacem movement; that composer grouped his Symphonic Movement No.3 with a musical depiction of rugby and a piece inspired by a steam locomotive, Pacific 231. For 10 points, name this country, whose composers include Heinz Holliger, Frank Martin, and Arthur Honegger.

ANSWER: Switzerland 

TOSSUP: One leitmotif in this opera begins with ascending B - D-sharp sixteenth notes, a drop down to a B half note, and then down to an F-sharp quarter note. Peter Brook was fired from Covent Garden for directing a 1949 production of this opera with sets designed by Salvador Dali. This opera is thought to be the first work to employ an instrument similar to the bass oboe called the heckelphone. Arnold Schoenberg and Gustav Mahler were among the attendees of a 1906 staging of this opera, described in the opening of Alex Ross The Rest is Noise. The protagonist drives (*) Narraboth to suicide in this opera. A cadence in C-sharp major in this opera features what has been called the most sickening chord in all opera. The protagonist strips naked in the Dance of the Seven Veils in, for 10 points, what Richard Strauss opera whose title character kisses the severed head of John the Baptist?

ANSWER: Salome 

TOSSUP: NOTE: Description acceptable. Tan Duns Elegy: Snow in June is a piece for cello soloist and this type of ensemble. The second movement of Alexander Tcherepnins first symphony is scored for this ensemble. The second movement of another piece for this ensemble devolves into a mangled spoken setting of Gertrude Steins The World is Round. Charles Ives described a movement scored for this ensemble as a tonal contemplation of the Creation; James Sinclair realized that incomplete movement, the prelude to the Universe Symphony. Fandango (*) 13 and Clear Midnight are pieces composed for Eastmans ensemble of this type by its director, Michael Burritt. John Cages Living Room Music followed the success of four Constructions for this ensemble, the first of which is in Metal. Ionisation is, for 10 points, often considered to be the first work written for what ensemble comprised of struck instruments?

ANSWER: percussion ensemble [accept reasonable equivalents] 

TOSSUP: A piece by this composer opens with the tubas playing the slow ascending half notes F, G, A-flat, C. The trumpets, then the low brass, playing descending E-flat, D, G staccato quarter notes underneath woodwind trills on G to open the last movement of a piece by this composer. A euphonium solo whose melody is based on the folk tune Swansea Town appears in the first movement of another piece by this composer of the prelude and scherzo (*) Hammersmith. This composer included an ascending E-flat, F, C short-long-short motif that is first introduced by the low brass in a first-movement Chaconne, which is followed by an Intermezzo and a March. An anvil is used in the Song of the Blacksmith in a piece by this composer that concludes with a Fantasia on the Dargason. Two suites in E-flat and F for military band were composed byfor 10 pointswhat composer who taught at St Pauls Girls School?

ANSWER: Gustav Holst [or Gustav Theodore Holst or Gustavus Theodore von Holst] 

TOSSUP: A Long Dance and Dance of the Exorcists appears in a ballet from this country that was choreographed by Marina Kesler, who is also from here. A conductor from this country is the current music director of the Deutsche Kammerphilharmonie Bremen. That conductors father, also from this country, brought the Gothenburg Symphony Orchestra to international fame while serving as music director from 1982 to 2004. Besides Eduard Tubin, another composer from this country wrote a prolation canon based on a descending A-minor scale in a piece for strings, in response to the (*) death of another composer. Cantus in Memoriam Benjamin Britten is by a composer from this country whose trademark diatonic, minimalist style is named for its resemblance to bells. For 10 points, the tintinnabuli style is employed by Arvo Part [payrt], a composer from what country?

ANSWER: Republic of Estonia 

TOSSUP: A piece for string quartet responding to this event was originally meant to be about the death of the composers friend Margaret Shafer. This event is commemorated by a piece for wind ensemble that begins with an unaccompanied solo trumpet playing an ascending short F, G, B-flat, followed by a long C. This event inspired a song cycle that sets a section of Homers Iliad, poems by Li Po and Czeslaw Milosz ['CHEH-swahf MEE-woash'], and the title poem by Yip Harburg. Joan Towers In (*) Memory and Eric Ewazen's A Hymn for the Lost and the Living are about this event. Another piece about this event incorporates quotes from Portraits of Grief and opens with a boy's voice repeating the word missing. For 10 points, name this 21st-century event that inspired John Corgilianos One Sweet Morning and John Adamss On the Transmigration of Souls.

ANSWER: September 11th attacks [or 9/11; accept obvious equivalents, mentioning the Twin Towers or World Trade Center] 

TOSSUP: The opening of the second movement of this composers violin concerto features a repeated jittery short-short-short-long E-flat, F-flat, D-flat, E-flat motif, before the soloist eventually enters with the long ascending notes B, D, E. This composers violin concerto, which opens with the soloist playing two sixteenth-note Ds, then the eighth-notes F-E-F, was transcribed into a flute concerto by Jean-Pierre Rampal. That D minor violin concerto, which includes a tambourine part, was written by this composer for David (*) Oistrakh. A triple wedding on a farm concludes a ballet by this composer in which Giko snatches a bouquet being presented to Kazakov by the title character. Trombones glissando from F down to D over repeated F-sharps in the flute and xylophone in a section of this composers ballet Gayane. Sabre Dance was composed byfor 10 pointswhat Armenian composer?

ANSWER: Aram (Ilyich) Khachaturian 

TOSSUP: In the third movement of a piece by this composer, percussion play out of time as the unison strings repeat the high quarter notes F-sharp - G - A - D. This composers debut conducting the Boston Symphony in his piece ...but all shall be well prefaced his 2018 appointment as the director of Tanglewoods Festival of Contemporary Music. He said that he evoked the atmosphere of a massive nightclub with people dancing and taking drugs in a movement titled Ecstasio. At the debut of an opera by him, soprano Audrey Luna sang an (*) A7, the highest note in the Mets history; that was his adaptation of Luis Bunuels The Exterminating Angel. This composer extracted an Overture, Waltz, and Finale into three dances from a chamber opera that describes the sexual exploits of the Duchess of Argyll. For 10 points, name this British composer of Asyla who staged a blowjob in his opera Powder Her Face.

ANSWER: Thomas Ades 

TOSSUP: In one movement in this work, the organ repeatedly plays the notes C-sharp and D in a fugue that switches from 6/8, to 9/8, and back to 6/8 time. Its second movement opens with the brass playing a forced march in 7/4 time, which returns after the exclamation cut thee from thy soul. A day before this works premiere, another composers opera King Priam debuted in the same location. Heather Harper replaced Galina Vishnevskaya for the premiere of this work, whose central motif, an F-sharp to (*) C tritone, is resolved in its final movement. The line Half the seed of Europe, one by one is repeated in a movement of this work describing Abraham killing his son Isaac. Its premiere featured the composers partner Peter Pears and a boys choir performing at the newly reconsecrated Coventry Cathedral. For 10 points, name this choral work that sets Wilfred Owen poems to music by Benjamin Britten.

ANSWER: War Requiem, op. 66 

TOSSUP: John Zorn and Bjork have worked with an avant-garde player of this instrument named Zeena Parkins. Another artist played this Western instrument on an album adapting Omar Khayyams lyrics to music, titled for her Rubaiyat. A third player of this instrument sings the signifieds butt heads / With the signifiers on the song This Side of the Blue. Companies that make this instrument include Lyon Healy and Salvi. This instrument was played by Dorothy Ashby and a woman who used it on the albums (*) Ptah, the El Daoud and Journey to Satchidananda. That player of this instrument converted to Hinduism and changed her name to Turiya after the death of her second husband. One artist plays this instrument while singing the meteorite is the source of the light on the song Emily, the first track on the album Ys [EES]. For 10 points, name this instrument played by Alice Coltrane and Joanna Newsom.

ANSWER: harp [or concert harp] 

TOSSUP: Charles Lloyd plays the melody of Matchmaker on a flute on the final track of an album led by this musician, presenting jazz reworkings of songs from Fiddler on the Roof. The composer of the musical Hair, Galt MacDermot, won his first Grammy Award for the title track of an album by this musician, titled African Waltz. This man was the musician added to the Miles Davis Quintet to make it a sextet on the album Milestones. A live recording this musician made in 1959 at The Jazz Workshop, titled for his quintet in San Francisco, was a watershed moment in the popularization of (*) soul jazz. That style is also found on a song that Joe Zawinul wrote for him, titled Mercy, Mercy, Mercy, which he recorded with his younger brother, a cornetist and trumpeter named Nat. For 10 points, name this hard bop-era saxophonist nicknamed Cannonball.

ANSWER: Julian Cannonball Adderley 

TOSSUP: This is the number of composers profiled in a survey of minimalist music by Keith Potter. In a piece with this number in its title, maracas keep tempo as a dominant eleventh chord is played in gradually longer durations. The Second Dream of the High Tension Line Stepdown Transformer is part of a work named for this many Dreams of China by La Monte Young, who frequently used a dream chord consisting of this many pitches. A Steve Reich work is named for this many (*) Organs. Two of Philip Glasss works for this many performers were adapted from the incidental music to Samuel Becketts play Company and the score to Paul Schraders film Mishima. Steve Reichs Different Trains was premiered by an ensemble of this many people named for Kronos. For 10 points, a John Cage composition lasts for how many minutes and 33 seconds?

ANSWER: four 

TOSSUP: The even-numbered movements of this composers seven-movement piano quintet are cadenzas for (respectively) viola and cello, two violins, and solo piano. This composer contrasted a Presto sfumato with a Trio notturnale in his first cello concerto. This composers friend Barbara Nissman got Leonard Slatkin to premiere an unfinished seven-movement tone poem by him, which ends with The Sun, The Moon, and the Stars and was inspired by (*) Mayan mythology. He wrote a set of variations for orchestra that closes with a rondo, and introduces its theme via a duet between cello and harp. His Neo-Expressionist period came after his Objective Nationalist period, during which he incorporated folk tunes from his native country, as in his ballets Panambi and Estancia. For 10 points, Variaciones concertantes and the operas Bomarzo and Don Rodrigo are by what Argentinian composer?

ANSWER: Alberto Ginastera  [The unfinished tone poem is Popul Vuh.]

TOSSUP: This artist included two alternate takes of Miles Davis Tune Up on a 1963 album which makes extensive use of a string section, titled Fusion! [this artist] with Strings. This artist recorded an album of covers from the Borodin-inspired musical Kismet as a member of an ensemble made up of Benny Barth, Richie Crabtree, and his two brothers, called The Mastersounds. He collaborated with the Wynton Kelly Trio on a live album that opens with a rendition of Miles Davis No Blues, and takes its name from a club in the West Village. This artists most famous album includes rendition of his songs Mr. (*) Walker and Four on Six. This artists signature techniques include playing melodic lines using parallel octaves and picking exclusively with the soft part of the thumb. For 10 points, name this jazz artist, who recorded Smokin at the Half Note and The Incredible Jazz Guitar of [this artist].

ANSWER: (John Leslie) Wes Montgomery 

TOSSUP: The Ruhig third movement of a 1947 concerto for this instrument begins with the soloist playing a sustained E, then jumping up to the descending notes A, G, then sustaining E again; that concerto is by Paul Hindemith. A concerto for this instrument opens slowly in 3/4 time with the piano repeating a quarter-note half-note rhythm with the notes C-E, D-F. An interlude separates two cadenzas subtitled Ignis fatuus and Corona solis in a concerto for this instrument, premiered by Stanley (*) Drucker and composed by John Corigliano. A piece for chamber ensemble and this instrument has a movement titled Hoedown (Mad Cow) and is about the composers father dying from Alzheimers disease. John Adamss piece Gnarly Buttons features this instrument, a cadenza for which links the two movements of Aaron Coplands concerto for it. For 10 points, name this instrument played by Benny Goodman.

ANSWER: clarinet 

TOSSUP: In 1989, one musician re-recorded a song named after this place with his Akoustic Band. A recording of a melody played by a pig castrator inspired one song on an album named after this place. In a standard named after this place, Stanley Clarke plays a bowed bass intro with an electric keyboard before the head, which features a samba drum pattern by Airto Moreira. A song titled for this place is the last track of the album Return to Forever. Recordings of traditional songs from this country by Alan Lomax inspired the arrangements of The (*) Pan Piper and Saeta for a Teo Macero-produced Third Stream jazz album. A Chick Corea standard and the opening track of a 1960 album arranged by Gil Evans were inspired by, for 10 points, what country home to Joaquin Rodrigo, composer of Concierto de Aranjuez?

ANSWER: Spain 

TOSSUP: A player of this instrument collaborated with the noise group Wolf Eyes on the album Black Vomit, although he may be most known for playing this instrument unaccompanied on a 1969 album that ends with a track dedicated to Leroy Jenkins. In a composition written by Leon Thomas and a performer of this instrument, Thomas begins yodelling after he sings about The Creators master plan. A player of this instrument composed a 37-minute piece in which two separate quartets, including one featuring Charlie Haden and Don Cherry, play in the left and right audio channels. (*) Karma is an album by a performer of this instrument, which is also the main instrument of Anthony Braxton. A player of this instrument included Lonely Woman on his album The Shape of Jazz to Come. For 10 points, free jazz pioneers such as Pharoah Sanders and Ornette Coleman played what instrument?

ANSWER: saxophone [accept specific forms, such as alto saxophone or tenor saxophone] 

TOSSUP: This musician released an album whose palindromic title serves as a musical motive, called U.F.O. Tofu. This musician, along with Pat Flynn and John Cowan, joined a band founded by Sam Bush, whose only Top 40 hit was a cover of Dennis Lindes Callin Baton Rouge. He collaborated with Joshua Bell to cover Debussys Doctor Gradus Ad Parnassum on the classical crossover album Perpetual Motion. This musicians namesake group includes percussionist Roy (*) Future Man Wooten, who plays a guitar-shaped drum synthesizer dubbed the Drumitar. This musician is married to Amy Washburn, another influential player of his instrument. He has been featured in the bluegrass supergroups Strength in Numbers and Sparrow Quartet, but made his name touring with New Grass Revival and his namesake group. For 10 points, name this innovative contemporary American banjoist.

ANSWER: Bela Fleck 

TOSSUP: A Franz Schmidt clarinet quintet dedicated to this man quotes an earlier clarinet quintet by Josef Labor, who dedicated eleven pieces to this man. A set of variations written for this performer includes a badinerie and two toccatas, and ends with a tarantella. Another piece written for him opens with low strings playing sustained and arpeggiated forms of the upwards-stacked fourths E-A-D-G. This performer was the dedicatee of Erich Wolfgang Korngolds only piano concerto. Benjamin Brittens (*) Diversions was written for this man, who for years maintained exclusive rights to a 1931 concerto that was written for him, but which he never performed. Eventually, he let Siegfried Rapp premiere that work, Prokofiev's Piano Concerto No. 4. The Battle of Galicia led to the amputation of the right arm of, for 10 points, what pianist for whom Ravel wrote his Piano Concerto for the Left Hand?

ANSWER: Paul Wittgenstein 

TOSSUP: A blues composition by this musician is name-dropped at the end of the chorus of Shelton Brookss Darktown Strutters Ball. This musician developed a chord progression consisting of a two-bar repetition of four seventh, sharp-four seventh, and one seventh chords, which was later modified and popularized by Fletcher Henderson. This musician is credited with coining the term for using syncopated Afro-Carribbean rhythmic variations in the right-hand, the Spanish Tinge. He re-lived his early days as a (*) brothel pianist, or professor in a series of Library of Congress interviews conducted by Alan Lomax. When this musician moved to Chicago, he founded an eight-piece band which recorded signature versions of Doctor Jazz, Wolverine Blues, and stomps named for Black Bottom and King Porter. For 10 points, name this leader of the Red Hot Peppers, a pioneering Dixieland jazz pianist.

ANSWER: Jelly Roll Morton [or Ferdinand Joseph LaMothe] 

TOSSUP: In his book on this piece, David Fanning suggests that its Allegretto third movement alludes to Camille Saint-Saenss Danse macabre. 13 bars into this pieces first movement, the first violin plays a sustained B-natural, followed by the descending staccato quarter-notes C, G, then a sustained E-flat, a quotation from the composers first symphony. Its fourth movement quotes the folk song Tormented by Grievous Bondage. The composer of this piece supposedly wept after hearing the Borodin (*) Quartet perform it. This piece, which was written while the composer was in Dresden working on the score of the film Five Days, Five Nights, is dedicated to the victims of fascism and the war. It consists of five attacca movements and prominently features the four-note motif D, E-flat, C, B, known as the DSCH motif. For 10 points, name this C-minor Dmitri Shostakovich chamber work.

ANSWER: Dmitri Shostakovichs String Quartet No. 8 in C minor, Op. 110 [prompt on Dresden Quartet before Dresden is mentioned] 

TOSSUP: A 1933 a cappella chorus piece titled for one of these things features text by Catarina Santoro and was included in the composers collection Canto orfeonico. The hymn Throw Out the Life-Line and the nursery rhyme Peter, Peter, Pumpkin-Eater are quoted simultaneously in a piece that depicts one of these things; that piano Phantasy that depicts one of them served as the basis for a later symphonic movement by the same composer in which different instruments simultaneously play in 3/2 and 4/4 time. A movement that depicts one of these things follows a Dansa movement about the Memento of the (*) Sertao. The Comedy second movement of Charles Ivess fourth symphony is based on an earlier Ives piano piece about a Celestial one of these things. The Toccata movement of Heitor Villa-Loboss Bachianas brasileiras No. 2 depictsfor 10 pointswhat kind of transportation vehicle?

ANSWER: trains [or locomotives or railroad cars or railroads or rails; accept Trenzinho; accept The Celestial Railroad; accept The Little Train of the Caipira or O trenzinho do caipira] 

TOSSUP: In a concerto from this country, the cello soloist enters with an extended high B over an E drone and the E - F-sharp - G - B ostinato with which the piece begins. The cello soloist in a piece from this country must also play a bass drum and flexatone, and is accompanied by piano only, percussion, and chorus: that piece is titled Canticle of the Sun. In another cello concerto from this country, a largely stratospheric and fortissimo coda requires the soloist to be amplified; complications from that composers 1985 stroke inspired him to use an even more jarring and fragmented version of his typical (*) polystylism. The seven timpani strikes that conclude an E-flat major cello concerto from this country were inspired by the ending of a compatriots Symphony-Concerto. For 10 points, Alfred Schnittkes music was suppressed by the government of what country that aggressively promoted Prokofiev and Shostakovich?

ANSWER: the Soviet Union [or Union of Soviet Socialist Republics; or Russia; the first three concertos are Prokofiev SC, Gubaidulina, and Schnittke no. 1] 

TOSSUP: In one opera, a solo for this instrument opens a scene titled The Escape, which follows one titled The Pyrenees. A concerto for this instrument opens in 2/4 with the soloist repeating the rapid sixteenth-notes F-sharp, A, D, G over the strings playing dissonant flatted chords on every second beat. In that concerto for this instrument, it is accompanied only by flute, oboe, clarinet, violin, and cello. The orchestra of Master Peters Puppet Show unusually includes this instrument, which was played at the premiere by the same performer who was the dedicatee of Manuel (*) de Fallas concerto for it. The phrase black pearl was used by a player of this instrument to describe part of a series of pieces for it. For 10 points, name this keyboard instrument played by Wanda Landowska on her landmark 1933 recording of the Goldberg Variations.

ANSWER: harpsichord 

TOSSUP: In a letter to Herbert Weinstock, this pieces composer described it as symbolic of mixed art in constant evolution. The French horns, trumpets, and harp repeat the eighth-notes F, G, A, B, A, G three times in a poco lento section of this piece that opens with the horn and flute playing the theme C-C-C, D-C-B. The composers previous work in the same genre was adapted from incidental music for Jean Cocteaus production of Antigone. The time signature shifts between 5/8 and 2/4 in the Vivo introduction to this piece. The (*) guiro [GWEE-roh] features prominently in the finale of this piece, which utilizes percussion instruments such as the tenabari, which is a string of butterfly cocoons, and the grijutian, which is a string of deer hooves. Three melodies from the Seri, Huichol, and Yaqui tribes of northern Mexico inspiredfor 10 pointswhat 1936 symphony by Carlos Chavez?

ANSWER: Sinfonia india [accept Carlos Chavezs Symphony No. 2 and prompt on partial answers] 

TOSSUP: A composer with this surname appended the motto I see the world with the flowers bedlight to his third symphony, which depicts merfolk in its second-movement scherzo, marked Allegretti agenole. Another composer with this surname included Like a grass-green spot in a lyric humoresque for soloists, chorus and orchestra titled for springtime on his home island. That composer with this surname performed in the second violin section at the 1894 premiere of his own First Symphony, which begins in G minor but ends in (*) C major. That composers last symphony ends with a theme and nine variations bookended by fanfares, concluding with two bassoons holding a flatulent-sounding low B-flat. For 10 points, name give this surname of a composer who wrote a snare drum cadenza to halt the orchestra in his Fifth Symphony, and a duel between two timpani in his Inextinguishable Symphony.

ANSWER: Nielsen [or Carl Ludolf Nielsen, or Carl August Nielsen] 

TOSSUP: A song introduced on this album later had lyrics added that declare: Second, third generations all blow / all the flatted fifths that we certainly know. Despite not playing on this album, Bud Powell received writing credits for a song on it, which he later recorded as Hallucinations. One song from this album credits L.A. Salaam as drummer and Cleo Henry as songwriter, with the former being a pseudonym for Kenny Clarke. Only three sidemen, including Lee (*) Konitz and tuba player Bill Barber, played at all three recording sessions for this album. Compositions written by Gerry Mulligan for this album include Venus de Milo and Jeru. Gil Evans insisted on the inclusion of a French horn in the nonet that recorded this album, which, while recorded in 1949 and 1950, was not released until 1957. For 10 points, name this Miles Davis album titled after a relaxed style of jazz.

ANSWER: Birth of the Cool 

TOSSUP: This composers complete piano works were edited for the Peters edition by Gunter Philipp. After a trill-filled introduction, this composers fifth piano sonata proceeds to a section in 5/8 time marked Languido.' This composer's seventh piano sonata begins with the right hand pulsing a chord consisting of the pitches B-flat, D-flat, and A. The fifth through tenth of his ten piano sonatas are all in one movement, and his third, fifth, and seventh piano sonatas all have seven (*) sharps in their key signature, a distinction they share with his Etude in D-sharp minor from his Opus 8. His fifth piano sonata employs his so-called mystic chord, and his seventh and ninth piano sonatas are nicknamed White Mass and Black Mass respectively. For 10 points, name this synesthetic composer of Prometheus: Poem of Fire.

ANSWER: Alexander (Nikolayevich) Scriabin 

TOSSUP: This composer utilized his chain-form principle in the Metamorphoses movement of a piece whose third movement Apogeum is entirely made up of 32 successive twelve-tone chords. This composer wrote a piece whose first movement consists of refrains and interludes labeled with the letters A through H. The second symphony of this composer of Musique funebre [myoo-zeek fyoo-neb] is comprised of two movements titled Hesitant and Direct. A menacing timpani and bass drum ostinato in 9/8 time over an F-sharp pedal point open a piece by this composer that ends with a passacaglia, (*) toccata, and chorale. This composer featured his technique of limited aleatorism in pieces such as Venetian Games, which was a drastic departure from an earlier piece by him that drew heavily from the folklore of the Kurpie region. For 10 points, name this Polish composer of a Concerto for Orchestra.

ANSWER: Witold (Roman) Lutosawski 

TOSSUP: Oliver Nelson provided the arrangements to Pharoah Sanders Japan on a 1971 album by this musician titled Afrique. Because they disliked each others style, two tenor saxophonists in this mans band were stationed on opposite ends of the sax section. The song Sent for You Yesterday by this man features vocals by blues shouter Jimmy Rushing. Guitarist Freddie Green was in the All American Rhythm Section of this mans band, which typically played (*) head arrangements from memory. This musician claims he wrote the standard Moten Swing while playing in Bennie Motens Kansas City Orchestra. In the 1950s, this mans revamped band began to be known as the New Testament, and it recorded the song The Kid from Red Bank. For 10 points, April in Paris, and One OClock Jump were signature tunes of what jazz pianist and swing bandleader?

ANSWER: William Count Basie 

TOSSUP: One of these compositions features a vocalist describing how a woman must wear the right clothes because Today is an important occasion. A series of these musical works was composed by David Byrne for the Minneapolis section of an opera made to accompany the 1984 Summer Olympics, titled the CIVIL warS. Another composer ended one of these compositions with a woman asking John to kiss her while holding hands in the moonlight. In 2007, Tim Fain was praised for his violin solos in the second, fourth and fifth of these pieces found in an opera that was choreographed by (*) Lucinda Childs. Robert Wilson coined the name for these pieces because they serve as joints between acts. The first of these pieces begins with a choir counting 1, 2, 3, 4. For 10 points, name these musical works that most famously occur as five intermezzos in Philip Glasss Einstein on the Beach.

ANSWER: Knee Plays  [Prompt on operas by asking What sections?]

TOSSUP: A musical tradition from this island is the subject of Michael Bakans 1997 article From Oxymoron to Reality, which describes how womens groups in that predominantly male tradition are societally encouraged to perform at slower tempi and with culturally feminine movements. A different tradition from this island prominently uses an instrument consisting of ten metal bars suspended vertically from a wood frame. In multiple traditions from this island, the instruments of the ensemble are paired in male and female varieties, and time is kept by a (*) kempli. Fast passages of interlocking rhythm called kotekan punctuated by a strike on its namesake instrument characterize that better-known musical tradition from this island. For 10 points, kreasi beleganjur and gong kebyar are varieties of gamelan from what Hindu-majority Indonesian island?

ANSWER: Bali 

TOSSUP: A piece based on this legend inspired the idea of intense alteration style in a book on Romantic Harmony and its Crisis by Ernst Kurth. A composition based on this legend contains a tape recording of a five-year-old reading from an adaptation of this legend; that work for piano and orchestra is in the form of six preludes and is by Hans Werner Henze. A duet between piccolo and contrabassoon, accompanied by percussion, opens the fourth movement of a symphony based on this legend; that movement is followed by one titled Joy of the (*) Blood of the Stars. The song cycle Harawi is part of a trilogy based on this legend, which concludes with the Turangalila-Symphonie and is by Olivier Messiaen. For 10 points, name this legend that titles a Richard Wagner opera containing a love-death.

ANSWER: Tristan and Isolde [accept any answer containing both names; prompt on partial answer; accept Yseult or similar in place of Isolde] 

TOSSUP: A conductor born in this country, who is currently chief conductor of the Stuttgart Radio Symphony, also portrayed the title character of Ilya Khrzhanovskys experimental film DAU. In June 2019, that conductor born in this country announced he would relocate his MusicAeterna ensemble from Perm, Siberia, to Moscow. William Trotters biography of a conductor from this country claims that Leonard Bernstein outed him to Sergei Koussevitzky before replacing him at the New York Philharmonic. A composer of this nationality wrote (*) Persephassa for six percussionists, an example of his genre-bending polytopes; that composers background in architecture inspired him to create the UPIC program for computerized composition, and to incorporate Le Corbusiers ideas into his piece Metastaseis. For 10 points, name this country home to Dimitri Mitropoulos and Iannis Xenakis.

ANSWER: Greece [or Greek; or Hellenic Republic; or Hellas] 

TOSSUP: This composers dream of an angel atop a lighthouse playing two trumpets simultaneously inspired the juxtaposition of two fanfares in one composition. Chou Wen-Chung completed this mans final work, which calls for two ondes Martenots [ohnd mar-te-NOHS] and a flexatone, adapts Anais Nins House of Incest, and is titled Nocturnal. This composers collaboration with Pierre Schaeffer led to his creation of a percussion tape used in his Deserts for wind ensemble. This composers first orchestral work ends with massive, blunt orchestral tone clusters played over a continuously wailing police (*) siren, and is a depiction of this composers time living in New York City. Georges Barrere commissioned him to write a piece for solo flute titled for the density of platinum. The technique of organized sound was used in works like Arcana and Ameriques by, for 10 points, what French composer of Density 21.5?

ANSWER: Edgard Varese 

TOSSUP: A performance of this song opened the July 17th, 1955 all-star jam session at the Newport Jazz Festival. Dexter Gordons last album as a leader is titled for this song, and was recorded on the set of a movie also titled for this song, in which Gordon stars. On the album Modern Jazz Trumpets, Dizzy Gillespie added a now commonly-used introduction to this song. The fourth bar of this song has the changes B minor seventh, E seventh, B-flat minor seventh, E-flat seventh, when played in its published key of E-flat (*) minor. The first recording of this song was by Cootie Williams, whose is sometimes uncredited for co-composing it. Its main composers most famous performance of it opens the album Genius of Modern Music. For 10 points, name this song by Thelonious Monk, often claimed to be the most-recorded song by a jazz musician.

ANSWER: Round Midnight 

TOSSUP: Oliver Herrmanns short film One Night, One Life dramatizes a performance of this work featuring soloist Christine Schafer and conducted by Pierre Boulez. In this work, the motive E - G - E-flat is the basis of a passacaglia depicting giant moths that block out the sun. In another movement of this work, a canon is repeated in retrograde when the main character discovers he has a white spot on his coat. A group originally named for this work was co-founded by Harrison (*) Birtwistle and premiered Eight Songs for a Mad King. A combination of flute, violin, clarinet, cello, piano, and vocalist comprise a type of ensemble named for this work. A mixture of singing and speaking called sprechstimme [SHPREK-shtih-muh] is used throughout this piece, which sets 21 poems by Albert Giraud. For 10 points, a clown from commedia dellarte is the title character of what work by Arnold Schoenberg?

ANSWER: Pierrot lunaire 

TOSSUP: The opening motif of a D-minor string quartet by this composer is transformed into the fiddlelike main theme of the fifth and final movement. Shortly after a horn call interrupts a frantic scherzo, a C-major march is introduced in a symphonic movement this composer described as the crystallization of chaos. A five-movement E-minor symphonic suite by this composer, sometimes treated as an unnumbered symphony, concludes with a reprise of the opening theme, over which the chorus chants the hero has (*) perished. When revising his fifth symphony, this composer made the original second-movement scherzo into the second section of the first movement. This composer of Voces intimae included a theme for solo trombone named for his wife Aino in his one-movement seventh and final symphony. For 10 points, name this composer whose Kullervo symphony was inspired by the Kalevala.

ANSWER: Jean Sibelius 

TOSSUP: In 1999, Yan Pascal Tortelier recorded settings of Psalms 24 and 130 by a composer with this surname. In 1937, Dinu Lipatti and a musician with this surname served as the pianists for a recording of Brahmss Liebeslieder Waltzes. A composer of this surname wrote a cantata based on a poem by Eugene Adenis that won the 1913 Prix de Rome. A conductor of this surname conducted the Boston Symphony Orchestra in the premiere of Stravinskys Dumbarton Oaks Concerto. A composer of this surname wrote (*) Faust and Helene before dying in 1918 at age 24. At age 10 or 12, a musician with this surname had reportedly memorized the entirety of Bach's Well-Tempered Clavier. While at the American Conservatory in Fontainebleau, a woman with this surname taught Virgil Thomson and Aaron Copland. For 10 points, give the surname of the composer Lili and her sister, the pedagogue Nadia.

ANSWER: Boulanger [accept Lili Boulanger or Nadia Boulanger] 

TOSSUP: This composer attributed his legendary sightreading skill to his ability to accurately count a bundle of stones tossed into the air. This composers third symphony begins with an unaccompanied bassoon solo in alternating 6/8 and 9/8 time, and has been recorded by Bryden Thomson and Vernon Handley as part of their cycles of this composers seven symphonies. Reflecting a lifelong fascination with Ireland, this composer orchestrated his Easter Rising-inspired E-minor piano sonata into his first symphony. This composer wrote the score for David Leans 1948 film version of (*) Oliver Twist. With his lover Harriet Cohen, this composer visited the Cornish castle that inspired his most famous work, a tone poem that depicts seagull calls and waves crashing against the cliffs of the title island. For 10 points, name this British composer of November Woods who depicted King Arthurs birthplace in Tintagel.

ANSWER: Sir Arnold Bax 

TOSSUP: This composer used a fugue to close the development of the first movement of his posthumously published Piano Concerto in C Major, which utilizes claves prominently in its second movement. After the short introductory fanfare to a piece by this composer, its three trumpet soloists play a melody building up a B-flat major chord, one player at a time. This composer arranged tunes like The Rakes of Mallow and The Last Rose of Summer in his Irish Suite for orchestra. This composer used a downward B to G violin glissando to represent the title animal in The (*) Waltzing Cat. He musically utilized the ring of a carriage return in his piece The Typewriter. This composers most famous piece ends with a trumpet whinny followed by an imitation of the clopping of the horse pulling the title vehicle. For 10 points, name this American composer of light music who wrote the music to Sleigh Ride.

ANSWER: Leroy Anderson 

TOSSUP: 2. The original recording of this song featured a short introduction by Herbert Stothart giving way to Murray Cutters celesta-filled arrangement of the A section. In its published key of E-flat major, this song's bridge begins by insistently rocking a minor third between B-flat and G. The best-selling contemporary recording of this song combined it in a medley with What a Wonderful World, with ukulele and vocals by Israel Kamakawiwo'ole. AFIs 100 Years...100 Songs list declared this the (*) best movie song of the 20th century. This song describes a place Where troubles melt like lemon drops / High above the chimney tops. It ends with the singer asking Why then, oh why can't I?, and opens with an octave leap on the word Somewhere. For 10 points, name this wistful song sung in a Kansas farmyard by Dorothy in The Wizard of Oz.

ANSWER: Over the Rainbow 

TOSSUP: This composer, whose musical friendship with Marin Alsop was documented in an NPR interview, wrote a tuba concerto that consists of the movements Dynamo, Crescent Line, and Adamant Scherzo. Another concerto by this composer is made up of movements named for rivers in the Great Smoky Mountains and was written for the string trio Time for Three; that piece is titled Concerto 4-3. Colin Currie was the dedicatee of a piece by this composer that won the 2010 Grammy Award for Best Classical Contemporary Composition, her Percussion (*) Concerto. She included a lyrical Chaconni second movement in another concerto, the first and last movements of which are called 1726 and Fly Forward. For 10 points, name this American composer whose Hilary Hahn-dedicated violin concerto won her the 2010 Pulitzer Prize for Music.

ANSWER: Jennifer Elaine Higdon 

TOSSUP: At one point in this piece, the flutes and clarinets play alternating measures over harp glissandos, representing the murmuring of rivulets falling from rocks. In that section, half of the cellos and all the double basses are instructed to remove their mutes one by one beginning with the first stands, to evoke the rising sun. Earlier, the entrance of a wind machine follows three short solos for flute, horn, and clarinet which represent three statues coming to life. It is not by Saint-Saens, but this piece ends with a bacchanale that is mostly in 5/4 time, and which follows a reenactment of Pans chase after Syrinx. The wordless chorus is omitted in the two orchestral suites adapted from this ballet, the second of which includes Lever du jour, Pantomime, and the closing Danse generale. For 10 points, name this ballet based on an ancient Greek romance by Longus, with music by Maurice Ravel.

ANSWER: Daphnis et Chloe (or Daphnis and Chloe; accept Daphnis and Chloe Suite No. 2 before wind machine) ACF Nationals 2018 Editors: Jordan Brownstein, Andrew Hart, Stephen Liu, Aaron Rosenberg, Andrew Wang, Ryan Westbrook Packet by the editors (13) Bonuses

TOSSUP: A concerto in C major for this instrument is the most popular instrumental piece by Francois-Adrien Boieldieu (bwal-dee-oo). In Brahmss A German Requiem, this instrument first enters on the word Tranen (tray-nen), or tears, and later plays the closing melodies of both the first and last movements. The composer of La Source, Alphonse Hasselmans, taught this instrument at the Paris Conservatoire. The modern version of this non-piano instrument was pioneered by Sebastien Erard. Two of these instruments play the opening theme of Vysehrad (vih-SHEH-heh-rad) from Ma Vlast. Debussy wrote a sonata for flute, viola, and this instrument, and after the flutes opening phrase in the Prelude to the Afternoon of a Faun, this instrument plays a glissando. It is usually played without the pinky fingers, and the concert version of this instrument has seven double-action pedals. For 10 points, name this instrument with 47 strings.

ANSWER: concert harp(s) [or pedal harp(s)]

TOSSUP: Louis Rosoor claimed that a piece for this ensemble was intended to bear the subtitle Pierrot argues with the moon. The second movement of that piece for this ensemble is a Serenade and features an arco passage for one performer marked ironique following a mostly pizzicato opening. That D-minor piece for this ensemble was the first of a planned cycle of six pieces for various instrumental combinations by Claude Debussy. Elfentanz, or Dance of the Elves, is one of the many challenging pieces for this ensemble by David Popper. Chopins sonata for this ensemble is in G minor, while Brahmss first sonata for this ensemble ends with a fugal movement based on Contrapunctus 13 from The Art of Fugue and is in E minor. Complete sets of sonatas for this ensemble by Beethoven and Brahms were recorded by the husband-and-wife team of Jacqueline du Pre and Daniel Barenboim. For 10 points, name this ensemble composed of a low string instrument and a keyboard instrument.

ANSWER: cello and piano [accept the instruments in either order; accept violoncello in place of cello or pianoforte in place of piano; accept cello and piano sonata before Elfentanz ]

TOSSUP: An aria by this composer in sonata form uses a wandering development to represent the jagged flow of streams, with a large melisma on the word serpent. That aria is from a larger piece by this composer with a critical score edited by A. Peter Brown, and that piece uses the rhythm of a siciliana for the aria Nun beut die Flur das frische Grun. A solo cello introduces an extensive theme later taken up by a solo bass vocalist in one of this composers settings of the words Qui tollis peccata mundi. This composers last three masses are all in the key of B-flat major, and the last of those is sometimes nicknamed for its prominent wind parts. Another mass by this composer got its nickname in response to the shocking outcome of the Battle of the Nile. For 10 points, name this composer of the Harmoniemesse, the Missa in tempore belli, the Nelson Mass, and the oratorio The Creation.

ANSWER: Franz Joseph Haydn

TOSSUP: A piece of this type E minor has a first movement marked allegro piacevole (pya-che-vo-le). The finale of a different piece of this type quotes the folk songs On the Green Meadow and Under the Green Apple Tree, both of which the composer had previously arranged in his 50 Russian Folk Songs. That finale in a piece of this type follows a third-movement Elegie that ends with all the instruments muted and playing harmonics. That piece of this type, which is not by Schumann, opens with an instrumental chorale passage marked sempre marcatissimo, in a movement designated a Pezzo (PET-zoh) in forma di sonatina. For his Introduction and Allegro, Edward Elgar returned to the same ensemble as his early piece of this type. Tchaikovskys piece of this type is in C major and, though not a suite, was written as an homage to Mozart. For 10 points, name these light compositions written for an orchestra with no winds or percussion.

ANSWER: serenades for strings [accept equivalents such as string serenades or serenades for string orchestra; prompt on serenades]

TOSSUP: In one book of these pieces, the composer warns at the end of the ninth piece that not without toil does one reach the end. A movement in this genre opens with the left hand playing bouncy chords that move from F major, down to F major seventh, down to F major with added sixth, and back up to F major seventh, in a single measure of 4/2 time. These pieces open the three masses in the Fiori Musicali by Girolamo Frescobaldi, who also composed two books entirely comprised of them. An F-major movement of this type ends the Symphony No. 5 of Charles-Marie Widor. A movement in this genre begins with a mordant on A, rapid scaling in D minor down to a C sharp, and then a quick half-step up to D. That movement in this genre opens the original 1940 version of Disney's Fantasia, in an orchestration by Leopold Stokowski. For 10 points, J. S. Bachs BWV 565 prefaces a fugue in D minor with what type of virtuosic piece, whose name comes from the Italian for to touch?

ANSWER: toccatas [accept Toccata and Fugue in D minor after fugue; prompt on Toccata and Fugue in D minor before fugue]

TOSSUP: Charles Rosen argues that this piece marks the first example of a double time-scale and a wave form that oscillates back and forth between tonic and distant keys in his article on its composers inflections of Classical form. This piece opens with the pianist playing the notes FAFEDE on the right hand, a figure that is repeated throughout the first six measures of this piece. The running sixteenth-note rhythm of the accompaniment to this piece is replaced by a series of slow chords during the vocal soloists exclamation Und ach, sein Kuss! (oont akh, zyne koos) The vocal refrain to this piece includes the phrases Meine Ruh ist hin, mein Herz ist schwer ('mine'-eh roo ist hin, 'mine' hairz ist shvair) uttered by the title character, and the piano accompaniment is generally understood to represent the motion of the object that character uses while singing. For 10 points, name this lied (leed) depicting the heroine of a Goethe tragedy, a composition by Franz Schubert.

ANSWER: Gretchen at the Spinning Wheel [or Gretchen am Spinnrade]

TOSSUP: One composers third numbered composition of this type quotes a drinking song of the Parecis people and uses the male choir to imitate a woodpecker. In a different piece of this type, which quotes the popular song Yara, the chorus mostly sings words made of primitive syllables, starting with the tenors on the words ja-ka-ta ka-ma-ra-ja. Francisca Gonzaga is credited with adapting this genre to the piano in pieces such as Corta-Jaca and Atraente, the latter of which was originally published as a polka. Another composer applied the name of this genre to 14 pieces, the last two of which are lost, and the tenth of which is called Rasga o Coracao (cor-a-sao), or It tears the heart. Originally, this was a purely instrumental genre whose masters included Jacob do Bandolim and Pixinguinha (pee-shin-geen-yah), and it was later adapted by Heitor Villa-Lobos. For 10 points, name this genre of Brazilian popular music whose name comes from the Portuguese for to cry.

ANSWER: choro (sho-ru or sho-ro) [or choru; or chorinho; or choros]

TOSSUP: A solo piano movement partly named for this animal concludes with a cadenza that repeatedly alternates between short lento passages with trills and vivace passages with ascending runs in the right hand played at a triple-p dynamic. That movement named in part for this animal, which is mostly in F-sharp minor, inspired the song Besame Mucho by Mexican singer Consuelo Velazquez and is part of the same suite as Candlelit Fandango. A composer included a Marche chinoise in a symphonic poem extracted from an opera named for one of these animals. It is paired with the Maiden in the fourth movement of Goyescas by Enrique Granados. The chorus May no rash intruder from Handels Solomon is nicknamed for these animals. Igor Stravinsky based his first opera on a Hans Christian Andersen story named for one of them. In a different piece, the sound of this animal is heard at the end of a movement depicting the Janiculum hill. For 10 points, Ottorino Respighis Pines of Rome calls for a recording of what songbird?

ANSWER: nightingales [or rossignols or ruisenores; accept Quejas, o la Maja y el Ruisenor or Aria of the Nightingale or The Song of the Nightingale or Chant du rossignol or The Maiden and the Nightingale or Nightingale Chorus; prompt on birds before songbird]

TOSSUP: This composer conducted Julius Eastman and the Fires of London on one of his own pieces in a 1970 recording for Unicorn. In an orchestral piece by this composer, the concertmasters solo is interrupted multiple times by wayward brass, representing a drunken party where the first fiddle can barely hold the band together. That piece by this composer ends with a bagpiper dressed in full Scottish regalia entering from offstage. This composer founded the St. Magnus Festival in his adopted home in collaboration with local poet George Mackay (muh-KYE) Brown, whose work formed the basis for his chamber opera The Martyrdom of St. Magnus. This composer of An Orkney Wedding, with Sunrise also composed a melodrama for a baritone with an extended range of five octaves, which requires the musicians to play in giant bird cages, like George IIIs pet bullfinches. For 10 points, name this British composer of Eight Songs for a Mad King, who passed away in 2016.

ANSWER: Peter Maxwell Davies

TOSSUP: One track on this album takes its name from its artists pronunciation of the residence of his patron, a member of the Rothschild family known as the Bebop Baroness. This albums first track features an unorthodox 22-bar chorus that is first played slowly and then repeated in double time. The recording of that title track for this album reportedly caused Ernie Henry to nearly have a breakdown and was assembled from 25 different takes. The iconic cover art for this album features its artist sitting, back-to-back and in a circle, with four copies of himself. This albums track Pannonica marks the only time its creator played the celesta on a recording. Both Max Roach and Sonny Rollins appear on every track on this album except for I Surrender, Dear, a solo piano track for this albums main artist. It was recorded ten years after its artists first Blue Note sessions, which included tracks such as Round Midnight. For 10 points, name this 1957 album considered the magnum opus of Thelonious Monk.

ANSWER: Brilliant Corners

TOSSUP: A mass by this composer features a motif in the bass voice of a falling fifth, from E to A; the fact that both of those notes would have been solmized on the same syllable inspired that pieces sometime title, Missa Mi-Mi (mee-mee). The death of Gilles Binchois (zheel BAN-shwa) inspired this composers four-voice motet Mort, tu es navre, and he also wrote a mass based on Binchoiss chanson De plus en plus. Johannes Lupi set to music a text written after this composers death by Erasmus. Another lament written after this composers death urges several composers to mourn this good father, giving rise to the theory that this composer taught the man who set that Jean Molinet poem to music, Josquin des Prez. A work by this composer may have been composed for the death of one of his patrons, Charles VII of France. For 10 points, name this Franco-Flemish composer of the oldest surviving polyphonic requiem.

ANSWER: Johannes Ockeghem [or Jean (de) Ockeghem]

TOSSUP: During a brief 3/8 waltz in the second movement of this piece, the first clarinet and bassoon play a variation of the opening theme of the first movement while the soloist supports them with persistent 16th-note accompaniment. The cadenza of this pieces first movement is briefly interrupted by a variation of the main theme, which is passed from flute to oboe to clarinet and finally to horn. The composer wrote two versions of that cadenza for this piece, although the original, heavier version is now printed as the ossia despite being widely considered the harder of the two. Vladimir Horowitz and Albert Coates made the first-ever recording of this piece, which was written in 1909 for the composers first tour of the U.S. Along with its C minor predecessor, this is the most frequently performed of the four pieces the composer wrote in the genre. For 10 points, name this extremely hard piece in D minor for a keyboard instrument and orchestra by the composer of Rhapsody on a Theme of Paganini.

ANSWER: Sergei Rachmaninoffs Piano Concerto No. 3 in D minor [accept answers mentioning Rachmaninoff and Piano Concerto and 3 or third, accept The Rach 3; prompt on partial answers]

TOSSUP: The second movement of this piece ends with two arpeggiated diminished-seventh chordsthe first pianissimo, the second fortissimobefore the third movement is played attacca. A recurring motif in its first movement consists of the left hand playing D-flatD-flatD-flatC and echoes how this pieces opening four-bar theme is repeated a semitone higher after its initial statement. This pieces first movement marks the first time its composer omitted the exposition repeat in the sonata-allegro form, while the final movement goes even further by repeating only the development and recapitulation. This pieces first movement ends with its composers first-ever use of a dynamic of three ps and begins at a tempo of allegro assai in 12/8 meter. For 10 points, name this piece in F minor for solo keyboard that, like its siblings Waldstein and Les Adieux, was written during Ludwig van Beethovens middle period.

ANSWER: Appassionata Sonata [or Beethovens Piano Sonata No. 23, or Beethovens Opus 57; accept any answer mentioning Beethoven and 23 and piano sonata; accept any answer mentioning 23 and piano sonata after Beethoven; prompt on partial answers such as Beethovens 23rd sonata; prompt on answers mentioning 23 and piano sonata but not Beethoven before Beethoven] ACF Nationals 2018 Editors: Jordan Brownstein, Andrew Hart, Stephen Liu, Aaron Rosenberg, Andrew Wang, Ryan Westbrook Packet by the editors (4) Bonuses

TOSSUP: The scherzo of one symphony of this number starts with pianissimo strings under a solo trumpet which plays a motif that, at concert pitch, jumps from E up an octave to a high E, then down to play a dotted rhythm on A, and then back down to low E. Some percussion parts in that symphony of this number are believed to have been added at the urging of the composers students and Arthur Nikisch. That symphony of this number calls for four Wagner tubas and opens with the cellos and a solo horn arpeggiating an E-major triad against violin tremolos. In the first movement of a different symphony of this number, the flute introduces the main theme following a string of repeated Es during the transition from an unusually long poco sostenuto introduction. The second movement of that symphony is built around a repeating quartereightheighthquarter rhythm, and Richard Wagner called that piece the apotheosis of dance. For 10 points, give the number shared by a symphony in E major by Anton Bruckner and one in A major by Ludwig van Beethoven that followed the Pastoral.

ANSWER: seventh symphony [ or Symphony No. 7]

TOSSUP: Though most of it is for 6 parts, a piece by a composer from this country unusually begins with a four-part SATB setting of Taedet animam meam from the second lesson of Matins. That composer from this country inserted a dramatic pause before a homophonic statement of the words O Beata Virgo within a mostly contrapuntal motet. The all-time best-selling album of Gregorian Chant, simply titled Chant, was recorded by a Benedictine monastery in this country. It is not Bohemia or Belgium, but the Requiem mass appears as a piece-within-a-piece in the Officium Defunctorum by a composer from here, who also wrote a mass based on his 4-part setting of O Magnum Mysterium. This country was home to a genre of song whose name now exclusively refers to Christmas carols, and which were often accompanied by the vihuela. For 10 points, name this country home to the monks of Santo Domingo de Silos, the composer Tomas Luiz de Victoria, and the villancico.

ANSWER: Spain (or Espana)

TOSSUP: Two answers required. A version of The Barbara Song from the Threepenny Opera appears on an album titled after the individualism of one of these two artists; that album also contains Time of the Barracudas, a track written by these two artists in collaboration. An album by these two men, Quiet Nights, caused one of them to split with longtime producer Teo Macero. The collaborations between these two men are considered quintessential examples of a movement in jazz known as the third stream. A collaborative work by these two men begins with an adagio B-minor theme originally played by the English horn. Together, these two men created an album of arrangements from Porgy and Bess and an album that includes a 16-minute long version of the Concierto de Aranjuez (ar-ahn-WHAYSS). For 10 points, name these two men, a pianist and trumpeter who together arranged the music for Sketches of Spain.

ANSWER: Miles Davis [or Miles Dewey Davis III] and Gil Evans [or Ian Ernest Gilmore Evans]

TOSSUP: Composer and type of piece required. In one of these pieces, marked largo, the left hand mostly plays repeating eighth-note block chords that chromatically descend, but the left hand drops out for most of measure 12 before returning to a first-inversion tonic triad in measure 13. Another largo example of these pieces opens with a measure of mostly quarter-note block chords starting and ending on C minor, which are slightly modified and transposed down to A-flat major in the following bar. The longest of these pieces is held together by a repeated A flat that is respelled as a G sharp in the middle section, which is in C-sharp minor, while the rest is in D-flat major. Alfred Cortot and Hans von Bulow each created epithets for all of these pieces, such as Chord and Suffocation. They were inspired by The Well-Tempered Clavier but have key signatures ordered by the circle of fifths. For 10 points, name this set of 24 piano pieces in all major and minor keys, the 15th of which is known as Raindrop.

ANSWER: preludes (for solo piano) by Frederic Chopin [accept Chopins Opus 28 or any answer mentioning (piano) preludes and Frederic Francois Chopin or Fryderyk Franciszek Chopin] ACF Nationals 2018 Editors: Jordan Brownstein, Andrew Hart, Stephen Liu, Aaron Rosenberg, Andrew Wang, Ryan Westbrook Packet by Oxford (Daoud Jackson, George Charlson, Jacob Robertson, Freddy Potts, Chris Stern) and Duke A (Ryan Humphrey, Gabe Guedes, Lucian Li, Annabelle Yang) Bonuses

TOSSUP: The lyrical second theme of this piece is introduced by horns and violas playing espressivo ma tranquillo. Like the fourth movement of the composers first piano concerto, the climax of this piece is marked allegro marziale animato, and that marking may refer to a trumpet calling man to battle. This piece was originally written as the introduction to four settings of poems by Joseph Autran. The score of this piece includes a preface which calls love the enchanted dawn of all existence and describes a storm that shatters the illusions of youth. Like its predecessors, Ce quon entend sur la montagne (se kon awn-tawn sur la MON-tan-yuh) and Tasso, Lamento e Trionfo, this piece is dedicated to the composers lover, Carolyne von Sayn-Wittgenstein. Although it was conceived as an overture to the composers choral cycle The Four Elements, the title of this piece is taken from a poem by Alphonse de Lamartine. For 10 points, name this third and most frequently performed symphonic poem by Franz Liszt.

ANSWER: Les preludes [or The Preludes]

TOSSUP: The oboes join the bass soloist in an air from a piece of this type in which a ground bass represents the title machine, likely referring to the organ. Another piece of this type contains a countertenor duet that exhorts sound the trumpet and on the sprightly hautboy (OH-boy) play. That piece of this type survives only in a copy edited by Robert Pindar with several dubious scoring choices and contains the countertenor aria Strike the viol, touch the lute. The bass aria Bacchus, ever fair and young appears in a piece of this type which centers on Timotheuss legendary entertainment of the title character. John Dryden provided the lyrics for a John Blow piece of this type following the death of the latters former student, who had previously written several, such as Come Ye Sons of Art for the birthday of Queen Mary II. For 10 points, name these pieces exemplified by Handels Alexanders Feast and Henry Purcells Hail! Bright Cecilia, both written for that saints feast day.

ANSWER: odes [accept Ode to St. Cecilia or Ode for Queen Marys Birthday]

TOSSUP: The five unifying motifs in a song cycle by this composer include an agitated theme that first appears when the singer describes quails singing out in the morning and a so-called Carlovengian theme linked to the name of a poets love interest. The memory of far-off bells in the town of Cadirac inspired the slow movement of this composers second piano quartet in G minor, while his first piano quartet is in C minor. This composer, who wrote the song cycle La bonne chanson using seven poems by Paul Verlaine, was director of the Paris Conservatoire from 1905 to 1920. An orchestral piece by this composer, with optional chorus, begins with pizzicato strings playing F-sharp minor arpeggios under a flute solo and is based on a Renaissance dance. His most popular choral piece features a prominent soprano solo in the Pie Jesu movement. For 10 points, name this French composer of a melancholy Pavane and a Requiem, Opus 48.

ANSWER: Gabriel Faure [or Gabriel Urbain Faure]

TOSSUP: Pages of this composers diary indicate that he originally planned to base his final piece around the motto FFFF, for Frisch, Fromm, Frolich (FRU-lik), Frei (fry). In its final form, that piece is built on a series whose first nine notes form a chain of ascending thirds, while the last three form a chain of ascending whole steps. George Perle wrote a two-volume study of the operas of this composer. In a piece by this composer for string quartet, all of the movements have an emotion as part of their starting tempo, such as the fifth, marked presto delirando and later tenebroso. The sixth movement of that piece by this man, marked largo desolato, quotes from Tristan und Isolde in reference to his love affair with Hanna Fuchs-Robettin. This composer of Seven Early Songs dedicated his last major piece to the memory of an angel, referring to the death of Manon Gropius. For 10 points, what Austrian composer of the Lyric Suite and a twelve-tone violin concerto was a member of the Second Viennese School along with Arnold Schoenberg and Anton Webern?

ANSWER: Alban Berg [or Alban Maria Johannes Berg]

TOSSUP: Composer and type of piece required. In one of these pieces, the second movement in G-sharp minor begins with a first violin solo played fortissimo and entirely on the G string for twelve bars. The last of these pieces has all six movements in E-flat minor, all played without breaks between them, and all played adagio or adagio molto. These pieces are the subject of the book Music for Silenced Voices by Wendy Lesser. The thirteenth of these pieces, in B-flat minor, is the only one in a single movement and requires the players to strike their instruments at certain points. Another of these pieces, in C minor, quotes the Jewish theme from the composers second piano trio in its second movement and from his first cello concerto, in E flat, in the waltz-like third movement. The most popular of these compositions is the eighth, which is dedicated to the Victims of Fascism and War and revolves around the composers signature DE flatCB, or DSCH, motif. For 10 points, name these chamber compositions by the composer of the Leningrad Symphony.

ANSWER: string quartets of Dmitri Shostakovich [accept any answer mentioning string quartets and Dmitri Dmitriyevich Shostakovich; prompt on quartets by Shostakovich or similar answers that mention quartets but not string quartets]

TOSSUP: In a ballet created in this present-day country, an amnesiac girl is taken captive at the Blue Grotto after a storm but later escapes with her beloved, the fisherman Gennaro. A tenor born in this country holds the record for the most appearances as Tristan at the Met with 128 and often starred opposite the Norwegian soprano Kirsten Flagstad in Richard Wagner operas. The ballet Napoli was created in this country, where the Italian-born dancer Vincenzo Galeotti taught for the last phase of his career. This home of heldentenor Lauritz Melchior was also the adopted homeland of the French-born dancer Antoine Bournonville, whose son August directed this countrys Royal Ballet for almost 50 years. A composer from this country employed two sets of warring timpani in his fourth symphony, which represents the will to live. For 10 points, name this home of the composer of the Inextinguishable Symphony, Carl Nielsen.

ANSWER: Denmark [or Kingdom of Denmark; or Kongeriget Danmark]

TOSSUP: The Flanders Quartet consists of players of this instrument, and it is the primary instrument Paul Leenhouts. Georg Philipp Telemann wrote a B-flat major double concerto for two of these instruments, strings, and continuo. Luciano Berio is credited with revolutionizing the 20th-century repertoire for this instrument with the piece Gesti, which was written for Frans Bruggen. Rampe and Zampf argued that an unusually named instrument in one of J. S. Bachs scores actually consists of two of these instruments joined together. The French flageolet (flah-zhoh-lay) differs from this instrument in its use of two thumbholes. The fiauti decho parts in the fourth Brandenburg Concerto were most likely intended to be played on this instrument. For 10 points, name this woodwind instrument ubiquitous in primary education, which, unlike the transverse flute, uses a whistle mouthpiece and is held straight in front of the player.

ANSWER: recorder [or block flute(s); prompt on fipple flute(s) or duct flute(s) or pennywhistles; prompt on fiauti decho or echo flutes or flauti decho or tin whistles before fiauti; prompt on flute before flute; do not accept or prompt on transverse flute(s)]

TOSSUP: During a concert in Padova, this composer improvised on themes from an earlier piano piece inspired by the legend of a harp left on the shores of San Francisco Bay and placed on a high point to vibrate freely in the wind. The liner notes for an album by this composer include a poem in which he imagines the Pentagon being turned on its side and painted purple, yellow, and green. This composer of The Harp of New Albion performed the parts for electric organ, electric harpsichord, doumbek, and soprano saxophone himself for the 1969 recording of a different piece. This composer used variable resistors to achieve just intonation on a Yamaha organ for his piece Descending Moonshine Dervishes. With La Monte Young, this man studied under kiranic singer Pandit Pran Nath. Another of his pieces consists of 53 cells, which performers can repeat at liberty. For 10 points, name this American minimalist composer of A Rainbow in Curved Air and In C.

ANSWER: Terry Riley

TOSSUP: Pieces of this type make up entries C32 through C48 in the Ernest Warburton Catalog of the works of Johann Christian Bach. A piece of this type by another composer only survives in an arrangement found in the estate of the composers biographer Otto Jahn (YAHN). That arrangement of a piece of this type replaces a flute part with a clarinet, which led Robert Levin to reconstruct the original scoring and to write an investigation of who wrote the piece. That spurious work of this type, numbered K297b, was originally written with solo parts for flute, oboe, horn, and bassoon. The most frequently performed piece in this genre is in E-flat major and requires one soloist to tune the strings a half step higher than usual. The Baroque concerto grosso was a predecessor of, for 10 points, what genre popular during the Classical period that is scored for multiple soloists and orchestra and exemplified by the one that Mozart wrote featuring violin and viola?

ANSWER: sinfonia concertante [or sinfonie concertante; or symphonie concertante]

TOSSUP: Amsterdam publisher Estienne Roger boasted that his edition of this composers opus 5 included ornaments for the slow movements as this composer would have played them. In one piece by this composer, the 11th and 21st variations are played almost entirely using double stops, and the main theme is based on the chord progression onefiveoneflat-sevenflat-threeflat-sevenonefiveone. A grave (GRAH-vay) passage by this composer includes the unusual directive to play arcate sostenute e come sta, or to bow the notes sustained and as written. The final section of that piece by this man is in G major and 12/8 time and opens with the two concertino violins playing the melody in parallel thirds. His twelfth violin sonata is a set of variations on the Portuguese dance tune La Folia. He placed a Pastorale ad libitum at the end of a piece inscribed as fatto per la notte di natale. For 10 points, name this Italian baroque composer whose Concerto Grosso Opus 6, No. 8, is popularly known as the Christmas Concerto.

ANSWER: Arcangelo Corelli

TOSSUP: In a string quartet by this composer, the opening viola solo starts with [read slowly] an eighth note B, a whole note B, then drops down to E, then plays an eighth note F-sharp, a whole note G, then down to B. The motif [read slowly] B-flat, E-flat, D, B-flat appears in an orchestral piece by this composer that opens with a harp solo, followed by a brass chorale. In a piece by this composer, the theme [read slowly] B, E, F-sharp, G, A, B, B appears after an opening in which two flutes play undulating E minor sixteenth note figures to represent waters; that piece appears in a cycle after one depicting the castle Vysehrad (VISH-eh-raht). In a string quartet by this man, a violin plays a high sustained E representing his tinnitus and oncoming deafness. For 10 points, name this composer of the From My Life quartet and The Moldau, which is among the six tone poems of his Ma Vlast.

ANSWER: Bedrich Smetana 

TOSSUP: Major composers of solo repertoire for this instrument include Ludwig Milde and Julius Weissenborn. A march is this instruments variation in The Young Persons Guide to the Orchestra. The most famous orchestral solo for this instrument, probably intended for its French variety, begins with a fermata on high C, followed by a mordent onB. The dulcian was the Renaissance precursor to this instrument, which is now generally made according to the Heckel system and features a pancake key. Important excerpts for this instrument include the main melody of The Kalendar Prince from Scheherazade and the opening to the overture of The Marriage of Figaro, where it plays along with strings. A solo by this instrument begins The Adoration of the Earth, the first section of Stravinskys The Rite of Spring. For 10 points, identify this low-pitched double-reed woodwind.

ANSWER: bassoon 

TOSSUP: A symphony by this composer opens with four quiet notes on the glockenspiel (GLOCK-en-shpeel). Another symphony by this composer opens with the same A played 26 times. The violas play continuously in the opening of his two-movement Symphony No.5, which, like his Symphony No.6, begins in tempo giusto (JOO-stoh). He included Hindu, Chinese, and Negro dances in his incidental music to Aladdin. Tempi denoted collerico, flematico, sanguineo, and malincolico reflect the title of this composers Symphony No.2, called The Four Temperaments. The last movement of this composers Fourth Symphony calls for two timpani to be placed on opposite ends of the stage and duel. For 10 points, name this composer of the Inextinguishable Symphony who hailed from Denmark.

ANSWER: Carl Nielsen 

TOSSUP: Charlie Parker recorded the song Noise with a jazz orchestra led by a man from this country, which achieved a big hit in the 1940s with the song Tanga. In the film Duck Soup, Groucho Marx whistles a tune from this country called The Peanut Vendor. A musician from this country recorded a hit 1962 version of Herbie Hancocks Watermelon Man on his album of the same title. Some musical ensembles from this country are called charangas. Dizzy Gillespie incorporated a song from this country, Manteca, into the album Afro, on which he collaborated with Chano Pozo. Popular dance styles from this country include rumba and conga. For 10 points, name this Caribbean country home to many African-influenced musical traditions, as well as a genre named for its capital called the habanera.

ANSWER: (Republic of) Cuba (The first clue refers to Machito, and the third clue refers to Mongo Santamaria.) Other Art (Jazz)

TOSSUP: This composer noted that the four trumpets must sound from opposite directions for the finale of a symphony whose program drew on a translation of Dziady (JAH-dih) by Adam Mickiewicz (ah-DOM meets-KYEH-vich). The fifth movement of a piece by this composer says that performers should be cheeky in expression for the performance of Three Angels Sang. The third movement of this mans Second Symphony, marked In quietly flowing movement, sets a poem about St. Anthonys sermon to the fishes. This composer used the tempo marking strong and decisive, or Kraftig, Entschieden (KREF-tig ent-SHEE-den), for a movement programmatically called Pan Awakens, Summer Marches In. His Second Symphony sets the poem Urlicht (OOR-leesht) by Friedrich Klopstock, while his Sixth Symphony contains three hammer blows of fate. For 10 points, name this composer whose Second Symphony is called Resurrection.

ANSWER: Gustav Mahler 

TOSSUP: Sikuri music is usually played with an instrument from this family called the siku. A Canadian musician often called Dragon [this instrument], Ron Korb, plays many instruments from this family from around the world, such as the Chinese xiao (shyow). A South Indian instrument from this family called the venu has a North Indian equivalent called the bansuri, which features in the origin story of the rasa lila dance. End-blown examples of this instrument include one used for thousands of years in the Middle East called the ney. Examples of the vessel type of this family of instruments include the ocarina (oh-kuh-REE-nuh). The syrinx is sometimes called the pan variety of, for 10 points, what family of high woodwind instruments that includes the half-sized piccolo?

ANSWER: flutes [accept end-blown flutes or pan flutes or vessel flutes; accept any mentioned flute variety before it is read, such as the ney or xiao; accept pan pipes; prompt on woodwinds or wind instruments] Other Art (Other Music)

TOSSUP: This piece was recorded with an unusually slow tempo in 1971 by Karl Bohm and the Vienna Philharmonic. This piece borrows thematic material from a section of Handels Messiah titled And with his stripes we are healed for the first subject of its second-movement double fugue. It opens with strings accompanying the notes [read slowly] DC-sharpDEF played on the bassoons, which are joined by the basset horns playing a fifth higher. A trombone solo occurs in this pieces Tuba mirum, which is in B-flat like its final three movements; however, like Verdis piece in the same genre, this pieces tonic key is D minor. At the request of the composers widow Constanze, this piece was completed by Franz Sussmayr. For 10 points, name this mass for the dead by the composer of Eine kleine nachtmusik (EYE-nuh KLY-nuh NAKT-moo-zik).

ANSWER: Wolfgang Amadeus Mozarts Requiem in D minor [or KV626; prompt on partial answer; prompt on Requiem in D minor] 

TOSSUP: A composer who spent most of his adult life working in this modern-day country wrote a piece based on the words lascia fare mi (LAH-shah FAH-reh MEE) using the soggetto cavato (so-JET-oh kah-VAH-toh) technique. Another composer who worked in this country set many of his hundreds of poems, such as those from his collection Remedy of Ill Fortune, to music and wrote a double hocket titled David. While abroad, a composer who mostly worked in this country wrote a mass titled for Duke Hercules, referring to his patron Ercole dEste (AIR-ko-lay DESS-tay). A song from this country, The Armed Man, is the cantus firmus for many masses. Styles called ars antica and ars nova flourished in a school named for one of this countrys churches. Noble courts in this country provided the main patronage of a loosely defined school of composers from Flanders. For 10 points, name this country home to the Notre Dame school.

ANSWER: France [or any historical incarnation of France e.g. Kingdom of France or Royaume de France; accept Franco-Flemish school]

TOSSUP: An arrangement of music from this work ends with a coda in which stepwise descending string passages are to be played like a prayer. In that arrangement of this works music, the instruction vigoroso is given for the A major string arpeggios that open the second section. This piece begins with strings and woodwinds building up an A major triad and an E major triad stacked on top of each other in a tempo marked Very slowly. This ballets music was originally composed for a thirteen-member chamber orchestra, but is typically performed by full orchestra as an eight-movement suite, including a movement depicting a revivalist and his flock. On a whim, a line from Hart Cranes The Bridge was chosen to title this ballet, whose score includes music for The Brides Dance and five variations on Simple Gifts. For 10 points, name this ballet with music by Aaron Copland.

ANSWER: Appalachian Spring 

TOSSUP: In the second section of a work titled for this event, the cello re-introduces a fugue subject while the saxophone plays a glissando, which it also plays during the overture over a steady drumbeat. Gottfried van Swieten (SVEE-tin) translated English works for the libretto of a choral work titled for this event, which is divided into three sections, the last of which is set in a garden and opens with the singing of In rosy mantle appears. A work titled for this event suddenly transitions from a quiet C minor overture on a loud C major chord accompanying the word licht, or light, and opens with a Representation of Chaos. African mythology was the source of inspiration of a jazz-influenced ballet titled for this event by Darius Milhaud (dar-YOOS mee-YO). Writings by John Milton were set to music in a Joseph Haydn oratorio titled after, for 10 points, what Biblical event?

ANSWER: the creation of the world [accept The Creation or La Creation du monde or Die Schopfung; do not accept or prompt on Genesis as none of these works are titled for Genesis] 

